STAR WARS - EPISODE 4: STAR WARS

THREEPIO	Did you hear that?  They've shut down the main reactor.  We'll be destroyed for sure.  This is madness!
THREEPIO	We're doomed!
THREEPIO	There'll be no escape for the Princess this time.
THREEPIO	What's that?
THREEPIO	I should have known better than to trust the logic of a half-sized thermocapsulary dehousing assister...
LUKE	Hurry up!  Come with me!  What are you waiting for?!  Get in gear!
THREEPIO	Artoo! Artoo-Detoo, where are you?
THREEPIO	At last!  Where have you been?
THREEPIO	They're heading in this direction. What are we going to do?  We'll be sent to the spice mines of Kessel or smashed into who knows what!
THREEPIO	Wait a minute, where are you going?
IMPERIAL OFFICER	The Death Star plans are not in the main computer.
VADER	Where are those transmissions you intercepted?
REBEL OFFICER	We intercepted no transmissions. Aaah...  This is a consular ship. Were on a diplomatic mission.
VADER	If this is a consular ship... where is the Ambassador?
VADER	Commander, tear this ship apart until you've found those plans and bring me the Ambassador.  I want her alive!
TROOPER	There she is! Set for stun!
TROOPER	She'll be all right. Inform Lord Vader we have a prisoner.
THREEPIO	Hey, you're not permitted in there.  It's restricted. You'll be deactivated for sure..
THREEPIO	Don't call me a mindless philosopher, you overweight glob of grease!  Now come out before somebody sees you.
THREEPIO	Secret mission?  What plans?  What are you talking about?  I'm not getting in there!
THREEPIO	I'm going to regret this.
CHIEF PILOT	There goes another one.
CAPTAIN	Hold your fire.  There are no life forms.  It must have been short-circuited.
THREEPIO	That's funny, the damage doesn't look as bad from out here.
THREEPIO	Are you sure this things safe?
WOMAN	I've told you kids to slow down!
FIXER	Did I hear a young noise blast through here?
CAMIE	It was just Wormie on another rampage.
LUKE	Shape it up you guys!...  Biggs?
LUKE	I didn't know you were back!  When did you get in?
BIGGS	Just now.  I wanted to surprise you, hot shot.  I thought you'd be here... certainly didn't expect you to be out working. 
LUKE	The Academy didn't change you much... but you're back so soon?  Hey, what happened, didn't you get your commission?
BIGGS	Of course I got it.  Signed aboard The Rand Ecliptic last week.  First mate Biggs Darklighter at your service...... I just came back to say goodbye to all you unfortunate landlocked simpletons.
LUKE	I almost forgot.  There's a battle going on!  Right here in our system.  Come and look!
DEAK	Not again!  Forget it.
LUKE	There they are!
BIGGS	That's no battle, hot shot... they're just sitting there!  Probably a freighter-tanker refueling.
LUKE	But there was a lot of firing earlier...
LUKE	Hey, easy with those...
CAMIE	Don't worry about it, Wormie.
FIXER	I keep telling you, the Rebellion is a long way from here.  I doubt if the Empire would even fight to keep this system.  Believe me Luke, this planet is a big hunk of nothing...
LEIA	Lord Vader, I should have known.  Only you could be so bold.  The Imperial Senate will not sit stillfor this, when they hear you've attacked a diplomatic...
VADER	Don't play games with me, Your Highness.  You weren't on any mercy mission this time.  You passed directly through a restricted system.  Several transmissions were beamed to this ship by Rebel spies.  I want to know what happened to the plans they sent you.
LEIA	I don't know what you're talking about.  I'm a member of the Imperial Senate on a diplomatic mission to Alderaan...
VADER	You're a part of the Rebel Alliance... and a traitor.  Take her away!
COMMANDER	Holding her is dangerous.  If word of this gets out, it could generate sympathy for the Rebellion in the senate.
VADER	I have traced the Rebel spies to her.  Now she is my only link to find their secret base!
COMMANDER	you anything.
VADER	Leave that to me.  Send a distress signal and then inform the senate that all aboard were killed!
SECOND OFFICER	Lord Vader, the battle station plans are not aboard this ship!  And no transmissions were made.  An escape pod was jettisoned during the fighting, but no life forms were aboard.
VADER	She must have hidden the plans in the escape pod.  Send a detachment down to retrieve them.  See to it personally, Commander.  There'll be no one to stop us this time.
COMMANDER	Yes, sir.
THREEPIO	How did I get into this mess?  I really don't know how.  We seem to be made to suffer.  It's our lot in life.
THREEPIO	I've got to rest before I fall apart.  My joints are almost frozen. 
THREEPIO	What a desolate place this is.
THREEPIO	Where are you going?
THREEPIO	Well, I'm not going that way.  It's much too rocky.  This way is much easier.
THREEPIO	What makes you think there are settlements over there?
THREEPIO	Don't get technical with me.
THREEPIO	What mission?  What are you talking about?  I've had just about enough of you!  Go that way!  You'll be malfunctioning within a day, you nearsighted scrap pile!
THREEPIO	And don't let me catch you following me begging for help, because you won't get it.
THREEPIO	No more adventures.  I'm not going that way.
THREEPIO	That malfunctioning little twerp.  This is all his fault!  He tricked me into going this way, but he'll do no better.
THREEPIO	Wait, what's that?  A transport!  I'm saved!
THREEPIO	Over here!  Help!  Please, help!
LUKE	... so I cut off my power, shut down the afterburners and came in low on Deak's trail.  I was so close I thought I was going to fry my instruments. As it was I busted up the Skyhopper pretty bad.  Uncle Owen was pretty upset.  He grounded me for the rest of the season.  You should have been there... it was fantastic.
BIGGS	You ought to take it a little easy Luke.  You may be the hottest bushpilot this side of Mos Eisley, but those little Skyhoppers are dangerous.  Keep it up, and one day, whammo, you're going to be nothing more than a dark spot on the down side of a canyon wall.
LUKE	Look who's talking.  Now that you've been around those giant starships you're beginning to sound like my uncle. You've gotten soft in the city...
BIGGS	I've missed you kid.
LUKE	Well, things haven't been the same since you left, Biggs.  It's been so...quiet.
BIGGS	Luke, I didn't come back just to say goodbye...  I shouldn't tell you this, but you're the only one I can trust... and if I don't come back, I want somebody to know.
LUKE	What are you talking about?
BIGGS	I made some friends at the Academy. ... when our frigate goes to one of the central systems, we're going to jump ship and join the Alliance...
LUKE	Join the Rebellion?!  Are you kidding!  How?
BIGGS	Quiet down will ya!  You got a mouth bigger than a meteor crater!
LUKE	I'm sorry.  I'm quiet. Listen how quiet I am.  You can barely hear me...
BIGGS	My friend has a friend on Bestine who might help us make contact.
LUKE	around forever trying to find them.
BIGGS	I know it's a long shot, but if I don't find them I'll do what I can on my own...  It's what we always talked about.  Luke, I'm not going to wait for the Empire to draft me into service.  The Rebellion is spreading and I want to be on the right side - the side I believe in. 
LUKE	And I'm stuck here...
BIGGS	I thought you were going to the Academy next term.  You'll get your chance to get off this rock.
LUKE	Not likely!  I had to cancel my application.  There has been a lot of unrest among the Sand People since you left... they've even raided the outskirts of Anchorhead.
BIGGS	Your uncle could hold off a whole colony of Sand People with one blaster.
LUKE	I know, but he's got enough vaporators going to make the place pay off.  He needs me for just one more season.  I can't leave him now.
BIGGS	I feel for you, Luke, you're going to have to learn what seems to be important or what really is important.  What good is all your uncle's work if it's taken over by the Empire?...  You know they're starting to nationalize commerce in the central systems...it won't be long before your uncle is merely a tenant, slaving for the greater glory of the Empire.
LUKE	It couldn't happen here.  You said it yourself.  The Empire won't bother with this rock.
BIGGS	Things always change.
LUKE	I wish I was going...  Are you going to be around long? 
BIGGS	No, I'm leaving in the morning...
LUKE	Then I guess I won't see you.
BIGGS	Maybe someday...  I'll keep a lookout.
LUKE	Well, I'll be at the Academy next season... after that who knows.  I won't be drafted into the Imperial Starfleet that's for sure...  Take care of yourself, you'll always be the best friend I've got.
BIGGS	So long, Luke.
THREEPIO	Artoo-Detoo!  It's you!  It's you!
FIRST TROOPER	Someone was in the pod.  The tracks go off in this direction. 
SECOND TROOPER	Look, sir - droids.
THREEPIO	Wake up!  Wake up!
THREEPIO	We're doomed.
THREEPIO	Do you think they'll melt us down?
THREEPIO	Don't shoot!  Don't shoot!  Will this never end?
BERU	Luke, tell Owen that if he gets a translator to be sure it speaks Bocce.
LUKE	It looks like we don't have much of a choice but I'll remind him.
OWEN	I have no need for a protocol droid.
THREEPIO	Sir - not in an environment such as this - that's why I've also been programmed for over thirty secondary functions that...
OWEN	What I really need is a droid that understands the binary languages of moisture vaporators.
THREEPIO	Vaporators!  Sir - My first job was programming binary load lifters... very similar to your vaporators.  You could say...
OWEN	Do you speak Bocce?
THREEPIO	Of course I can, sir.  It's like a second language for me...  I'm as fluent in Bocce...
OWEN	All right; shut up! I'll take this one.
THREEPIO	Shutting up, sir.
OWEN	Luke, take these two over to the garage, will you?  I want you to have both of them cleaned up before dinner.
LUKE	But I was going into Toshi Station to pick up some power converters...
OWEN	You can waste time with your friends when your chores are done.  Now, come on, get to it!
LUKE	All right, come on!  And the red one, come on.  Well, come on, Red, let's go.
LUKE	Uncle Owen...
OWEN	Yeah?
LUKE	This R2 unit has a bad motivator.  Look!
OWEN	Hey, what're you trying to push on us?
THREEPIO	Excuse me, sir, but that R2 unit is in prime condition.  A real bargain.
LUKE	Uncle Owen...
OWEN	Yeah?
LUKE	What about that one?
OWEN	What about that blue one?  We'll take that one.
LUKE	Yeah, take it away.
THREEPIO	Uh, I'm quite sure you'll be very pleased with that one, sir.  He really is in first-class condition.  I've worked with him before.  Here he comes.
LUKE	Okay, let's go.
THREEPIO	Now, don't forget this!  Why I should stick my neck out for you is quite beyond my capacity!
THREEPIO	Thank the maker!  This oil bath is going to feel so good.  I've got such a bad case of dust contamination, I can barely move!
LUKE	It just isn't fair.  Oh, Biggs is right.  I'm never gonna get out of here!
THREEPIO	Is there anything I might do to help? 
LUKE	Well, not unless you can alter time, speed up the harvest, or teleport me off this rock!
THREEPIO	I don't think so, sir.  I'm only a droid and not very knowledgeable about such things.  Not on this planet, anyways.  As a matter of fact, I'm not even sure which planet I'm on.
LUKE	Well, if there's a bright center to the universe, you're on the planet that it's farthest from.
THREEPIO	I see, sir.
LUKE	Uh, you can call me Luke.
THREEPIO	I see, sir Luke.
LUKE	Just Luke.
THREEPIO	And I am See-Threepio, human-cyborg relations, and this is my counterpart, Artoo-Detoo.
LUKE	Hello.
LUKE	You got a lot of carbon scoring here.  It looks like you boys have seen a lot of action.
THREEPIO	With all we've been through, sometimes I'm amazed we're in as good condition as we are, what with the Rebellion and all.
LUKE	You know of the Rebellion against the Empire?
THREEPIO	That's how we came to be in your service, if you take my meaning, sir.
LUKE	Have you been in many battles?
THREEPIO	Several, I think.  Actually, there's not much to tell.  I'm not much more than an interpreter, and not very good at telling stories.  Well, not at making them interesting, anyways.
LUKE	Well, my little friend, you've got something jammed in here real good.  Were you on a starcruiser or...
LEIA	Help me, Obi-Wan Kenobi.  You'remy only hope.
LUKE	What's this?
THREEPIO	What is what?!?  He asked you a question...What is that?
LEIA	Help me, Obi-Wan Kenobi.  You're my only hope.  Help me, Obi-Wan Kenobi.  You're my only hope.
THREEPIO	Oh, he says it's nothing, sir.  Merely a malfunction.  Old data.  Pay it no mind.
LUKE	Who is she?  She's beautiful.
THREEPIO	I'm afraid I'm not quite sure, sir.
LEIA	Help me, Obi-Wan Kenobi...
THREEPIO	I think she was a passenger on our last voyage.  A person of some importance, sir - I believe.  Our captain was attached to...
LUKE	Is there more to this recording?
THREEPIO	Behave yourself, Artoo.  You're going to get us in trouble.  It's all right, you can trust him.  He's our new master.
THREEPIO	He says he's the property of Obi-Wan Kenobi, a resident of these parts.  And it's a private message for him.  Quite frankly, sir, I don't know what he's talking about.  Our last master was Captain Antilles, but with what we've been through, this little R2 unit has become a bit eccentric.
LUKE	Obi-Wan Kenobi?  I wonder if he means old Ben Kenobi?
THREEPIO	I beg your pardon, sir, but do you know what he's talking about?
LUKE	Well, I don't know anyone named Obi-Wan, but old Ben lives out beyond the dune sea.  He's kind of a strange old hermit.
LUKE	I wonder who she is.  It sounds like she's in trouble.  I'd better play back the whole thing.
THREEPIO	He says the restraining bolt has short circuited his recording system.  He suggests that if you remove the bolt, he might be able to play back the entire recording.
LUKE	H'm?  Oh, yeah, well, I guess you're too small to run away on me if I take this off!  Okay.
LUKE	There you go.
LUKE	Well, wait a minute.  Where'd she go?  Bring her back!  Play back the entire message.
THREEPIO	been playing.  The one you're carrying inside your rusty innards! 
AUNT BERU	Luke?  Luke!  Come to dinner!
LUKE	All right, I'll be right there, Aunt Beru.
THREEPIO	I'm sorry, sir, but he appears to have picked up a slight flutter.
LUKE	Well, see what you can do with him.  I'll be right back.
THREEPIO	Just you reconsider playing that message for him.
THREEPIO	No, I don't think he likes you at all.
THREEPIO	No, I don't like you either.
LUKE	You know, I think that R2 unit we bought might have been stolen.
OWEN	What makes you think that?
LUKE	Well, I stumbled across a recording while I was cleaning him.  He says he belongs to someone called Obi-Wan Kenobi.
LUKE	I thought he might have meant Ben.  Do you know what he's talking about?  Well, I wonder if he's related to Ben.
OWEN	That old man's just a crazy wizard.  Tomorrow I want you to take that R2 unit into Anchorhead and have its memory flushed.  That'll be the end of it.  It belongs to us now.
LUKE	But what if this Obi-Wan comes looking for him?
OWEN	He won't, I don't think he exists any more.  He died about the same time as your father.
LUKE	He knew my father?
OWEN	I told you to forget it.  Your only concern is to prepare the new droids for tomorrow.  In the morning I want them on the south ridge working out those condensers.
LUKE	Yes, sir.  I think those new droids are going to work out fine.  In fact, I, uh, was also thinking about our agreement about my staying on another season.  And if these new droids do work out, I want to transmit my application to the Academy this year.
OWEN	You mean the next semester before harvest?
LUKE	Sure, there're more than enough droids.
OWEN	Harvest is when I need you the most.  Only one more season.  This year we'll make enough on the harvest so I'll be able to hire some more hands.  And then you can go to the Academy next year.
OWEN	You must understand I need you here, Luke.
LUKE	But it's a whole 'nother year.
OWEN	Look, it's only one more season.
LUKE	Yeah, that's what you said last year when Biggs and Tank left.
AUNT BERU	Where are you going?
LUKE	It looks like I'm going nowhere.  I have to finish cleaning those droids.
AUNT BERU	Owen, he can't stay here forever.  Most of his friends have gone.  It means so much to him.
OWEN	I'll make it up to him next year.  I promise.
AUNT BERU	Luke's just not a farmer, Owen.  He has too much of his father in him.
OWEN	That's what I'm afraid of.
LUKE	What are you doing hiding there?
THREEPIO	It wasn't my fault, sir.  Please don't deactivate me.  I told him not to go, but he's faulty, malfunctioning; kept babbling on about his mission.
LUKE	Oh, no!
THREEPIO	That R2 unit has always been a problem.  These astro-droids are getting quite out of hand.  Even I can't understand their logic at times. 
LUKE	How could I be so stupid?  He's nowhere in sight.  Blast it!
THREEPIO	Pardon me, sir, but couldn't we go after him?
LUKE	It's too dangerous with all the Sand People around.  We'll have to wait until morning.
OWEN	Luke, I'm shutting the power down for the night.
LUKE	All right, I'll be there in a few minutes.  Boy, am I gonna get it.
LUKE	You know that little droid is going to cause me a lot of trouble.
THREEPIO	Oh, he excels at that, sir.
OWEN	Luke?  Luke?  Luke?  Where could he be loafing now!
OWEN	Have you seen Luke this morning?
AUNT BERU	He said he had some things to do before he started today, so he left early.
OWEN	Uh?  Did he take those two new droids with him?
AUNT BERU	I think so.
OWEN	Well, he'd better have those units in the south range repaired bemidday or there'll be hell to pay!
LUKE	How's that.
LUKE	Old Ben Kenobi lives out in this direction somewhere, but I don't see how that R2 unit could have come this far.  We must have missed him.  Uncle Owen isn't going to take this very well.
THREEPIO	Sir, would it help if you told him it was my fault.
LUKE	Sure.  He needs you.  He'd probably only deactivate you for a day or so...
THREEPIO	Deactivate!  Well, on the other hand if you hadn't removed his restraining bolt...
LUKE	Wait, there's something dead ahead on the scanner.  It looks like our droid... hit the accelerator.
LUKE	Hey, whoa, just where do you think you're going?
THREEPIO	Master Luke here is your rightful owner.  We'll have no more of this Obi-Wan Kenobi jibberish... and don't talk to me of your mission, either.  You're fortunate he doesn't blast you into a million pieces right here.
LUKE	Well, come on. It's getting late.  I only hope we can get back before Uncle Owen really blows up.
THREEPIO	If you don't mind my saying so, sir, I think you should deactivate the little fugitive until you've gotten him back to your workshop.
LUKE	No, he's not going to try anything.
LUKE	What's wrong with him now?
THREEPIO	Oh my... sir, he says there are several creatures approaching from the southeast.
LUKE	Sand People!  Or worse!  Come on, let's have a look.  Come on.
LUKE	There are two Banthas down there but I don't see any... wait a second, they're Sand People all right.  I can see one of them now.
BEN	Hello there!  Come here my little friend.  Don't be afraid.
BEN	Don't worry, he'll be all right.
LUKE	What happened?
BEN	Rest easy, son, you've had a busy day.  You're fortunate you're still in one piece.
LUKE	Ben?  Ben Kenobi!  Boy, am I glad to see you! 
BEN	The Jundland Wastes are not to be traveled lightly.  Tell me, young Luke, what brings you out this far?
LUKE	Oh, this little droid!  I think he's searching for his former master...  I've never seen such devotion in a droid before... there seems tobe no stopping him.  He claims to be the property of an Obi-Wan Kenobi.  Is he a relative of yours?  Do you know who he's talking about?
BEN	Obi-Wan Kenobi... Obi-Wan?  Now thats a name I haven't heard in a long time... a long time.
LUKE	I think my uncle knew him.  He said he was dead.
BEN	Oh, he's not dead, no... not yet.
LUKE	You know him!
BEN	Well of course, of course I know him.  He's me!  I haven't gone by the name Obi-Wan since oh, before you were born.
LUKE	Then the droid does belong to you.
BEN	Don't seem to remember ever owning a droid.  Very interesting... 
BEN	I think we better get indoors.  The Sand People are easily startled but they will soon be back and in greater numbers.
LUKE	... Threepio!
THREEPIO	Where am I?  I must have taken a bad step...
LUKE	Can you stand?  We've got to get out of here before the Sand People return.
THREEPIO	I don't think I can make it.  You go on, Master Luke.  There's no sense in you risking yourself on my account.  I'm done for.
LUKE	No, you're not.  What kind of talk is that?
BEN	Quickly, son... they're on the move.
LUKE	No, my father didn't fight in the wars.  He was a navigator on a spice freighter.
BEN	That's what your uncle told you.  He didn't hold with your father's ideals.  Thought he should have stayed here and not gotten involved.
LUKE	You fought in the Clone Wars?
BEN	Yes, I was once a Jedi Knight the same as your father.
LUKE	I wish I'd known him.
BEN	He was the best star-pilot in the galaxy, and a cunning warrior.  I understand you've become quite a good pilot yourself.  And he was a good friend.  Which reminds me...
BEN	I have something here for you.  Your father wanted you to have this when you were old enough, but your uncle wouldn't allow it.  He feared you might follow old Obi-Wan on some damned-fool idealistic crusade like your father did. 
THREEPIO	Sir, if you'll not be needing me, I'll close down for awhile.
LUKE	Sure, go ahead.
LUKE	What is it?
BEN	Your fathers lightsaber.  This is the weapon of a Jedi Knight.  Not as clumsy or as random as a blaster.
BEN	An elegant weapon for a morecivilized time.  For over a thousand generations the Jedi Knights were the guardians of peace and justice in the Old Republic.  Before the dark times, before the Empire.
LUKE	How did my father die?
BEN	A young Jedi named Darth Vader, who was a pupil of mine until he turned to evil, helped the Empire hunt down and destroy the Jedi Knights.  He betrayed and murdered your father.  Now the Jedi are all but extinct.  Vader was seduced by the dark side of the Force.
LUKE	The Force?
BEN	Well, the Force is what gives the Jedi his power.  It's an energy field created by all living things.  It surrounds us and penetrates us.  It binds the galaxy together.
BEN	Now, let's see if we can't figure out what you are, my little friend.  And where you come from.
LUKE	I saw part of the message he was...
BEN	I seem to have found it.
LEIA	General Kenobi, years ago you served my father in the Clone Wars.  Now he begs you to help him in his struggle against the Empire.  I regret that I am unable to present my father's request to you in person, but my ship has fallen under attack and I'm afraid my mission to bring you to Alderaan has failed.  I have placed information vital to the survival of the Rebellion into the memory systems of this R2 unit.  My father will know how to retrieve it.  You must see this droid safely delivered to him on Alderaan.  This is our most desperate hour.  Help me, Obi-Wan Kenobi, you're my only hope.
BEN	You must learn the ways of the Force if you're to come with me to Alderaan.
LUKE	Alderaan?  I'm not going to Alderaan.  I've got to go home.  It's late, I'm in for it as it is.
BEN	I need your help, Luke.  I'm getting too old for this sort of thing.She needs your help.
LUKE	I can't get involved!  I've got work to do!  It's not that I like the Empire.  I hate it!  But there's nothing I can do about it right now.  It's such a long way from here.
BEN	That's your uncle talking.
LUKE	Oh, God, my uncle.  How am I ever going to explain this?
BEN	Learn about the Force, Luke.
LUKE	Look, I can take you as far as Anchorhead.  You can get a transport there to Mos Eisley or wherever you're going.
BEN	You must do what you feel is right, of course.
TAGGE	Until this battle station is fully operational we are vulnerable.  The Rebel Alliance is too well equipped.  They're more dangerous than you realize.
MOTTI	Dangerous to your starfleet, Commander; not to this battle station!
TAGGE	The Rebellion will continue to gain support in the Imperial Senate as long as....
TARKIN	The Imperial Senate will no longer be of any concern to us.  I've just received word that the Emperor has dissolved the council permanently.  The last remnants of the Old Republic have been swept away.
TAGGE	That's impossible!  How will the Emperor maintain control without the bureaucracy?
TARKIN	The regional governors now have direct control over territories.  Fear will keep the local systems in line.  Fear of this battle station.
TAGGE	And what of the Rebellion?  If the Rebels have obtained a complete technical readout of this station, it is possible, however unlikely, that they might find a weakness and exploit it.
VADER	The plans you refer to will soon be back in our hands.
MOTTI	Any attack made by the Rebels against this station would be a useless gesture, no matter what technical data they've obtained.  This station is now the ultimate power in the universe.  I suggest we use it!
VADER	Don't be too proud of this technological terror you've constructed.  The ability to destroy a planet is insignificant next to the power of the Force.
MOTTI	Don't try to frighten us with your sorcerer's ways, Lord Vader.  Your sad devotion to that ancient religion has not helped you conjure up the stolen data tapes, or given you clairvoyance enough to find the Rebel's hidden fort...
VADER	I find your lack of faith disturbing.
TARKIN	Enough of this!  Vader, release him!
VADER	As you wish.
TARKIN	This bickering is pointless.  Lord Vader will provide us with the location of the Rebel fortress by the time this station is operational.  We will then crush the Rebellion with one swift stroke.
LUKE	It looks like Sand People did this, all right.  Look, here are gaffi sticks, bantha tracks.  It's just... I never heard of them hitting anything this big before.
BEN	They didn't.  But we are meant to think they did.  These tracks are side by side.  Sand People always ride single file to hide there numbers.
LUKE	These are the same Jawas that sold us Artoo and Threepio.
BEN	And these blast points, too accurate for Sand People.  Only Imperial stormtroopers are so precise.
LUKE	Why would Imperial troops want to slaughter Jawas?
LUKE	If they traced the robots here, they may have learned who they sold them to.  And that would lead them back home!
BEN	Wait, Luke!  It's too dangerous.
LUKE	Uncle Owen!  Aunt Beru!  Uncle Owen!
VADER	And, now Your Highness, we will discuss the location of your hidden Rebel base.
BEN	There's nothing you could have done, Luke, had you been there.  You'd have been killed, too, and the droids would now be in the hands of the Empire.
LUKE	I want to come with you to Alderaan.  There's nothing here for me now.  I want to learn the ways of the Force and become a Jedi like my father.
BEN	Mos Eisley Spaceport.  You will never find a more wretched hive of scum and villainy.  We must be cautious.
TROOPER	How long have you had these droids?
LUKE	About three or four seasons.
BEN	They're for sale if you want them.
TROOPER	Let me see your identification.
BEN	You don't need to see his identification.
TROOPER	We don't need to see his identification.
BEN	looking for.
TROOPER	These are not the droids we're looking for.
BEN	He can go about his business.
TROOPER	You can go about your business.
BEN	Move along.
TROOPER	Move along.  Move along.
THREEPIO	I can't abide these Jawas.  Disgusting creatures.
LUKE	Go on, go on.  I can't understand how we got by those troopers.  I thought we were dead.
BEN	The Force can have a strong influence on the weak-minded.  You will find it a powerful ally.
LUKE	Do you really think we're going to find a pilot here that'll take us to Alderaan?
BEN	Well, most of the best freighter pilots can be found here.  Only watch your step.  This place can be a little rough.
LUKE	I'm ready for anything.
THREEPIO	Come along, Artoo.
BARTENDER	We don't serve their kind here!
LUKE	What?
BARTENDER	Your droids. They'll have to wait outside.  We don't want them here.
LUKE	Listen, why don't you wait out by the speeder.  We don't want any trouble.
THREEPIO	I heartily agree with you sir.
CREATURE	Negola dewaghi wooldugger?!?
HUMAN	He doesn't like you.
LUKE	I'm sorry.
HUMAN	I don't like you either
HUMAN	Don't insult us.  You just watch yourself.  We're wanted men.  I have the death sentence on twelve systems.
LUKE	I'll be careful than.
HUMAN	You'll be dead.
BEN	This little one isn't worth the effort.  Come let me buy you something...
BARTENDER	No blasters!  No blaster!
BEN	This is Chewbacca.  He's first-mate on a ship that might suit our needs.
THREEPIO	I don't like the look of this.
HAN	Han Solo.  I'm captain of the Millennium Falcon.  Chewie here tells me you're looking for passage to the Alderaan system.
BEN	Yes, indeed.  If it's a fast ship.
HAN	Fast ship?  You've never heard of the Millennium Falcon?
BEN	Should I have?
HAN	It's the ship that made the Kessel run in less than twelve parsecs!
HAN	I've outrun Imperial starships, not the local bulk-cruisers, mind you.  I'm talking about the big Corellian ships now.  She's fast enough for you, old man.  What's the cargo?
BEN	Only passengers.  Myself, the boy, two droids, and no questions asked.
HAN	What is it?  Some kind of local trouble?
BEN	Let's just say we'd like to avoid any Imperial entanglements.
HAN	Well, that's the real trick, isn't it?  And it's going to cost you something extra.  Ten thousand in advance.
LUKE	Ten thousand?  We could almost buy our own ship for that!
HAN	But who's going to fly it, kid!  You?
LUKE	You bet I could.  I'm not such a bad pilot myself!  We don't have to sit here and listen...
BEN	We haven't that much with us.  But we could pay you two thousand now, plus fifteen when we reach Alderaan.
HAN	Seventeen, huh!
HAN	Okay.  You guys got yourself a ship.  We'll leave as soon as you're ready.  Docking bay Ninety-four.
BEN	Ninety-four.
HAN	Looks like somebody's beginning to take an interest in your handiwork.
TROOPER	All right, we'll check it out.
HAN	Seventeen thousand!  Those guys must really be desperate.  This could really save my neck.  Get back to the ship and get her ready.
BEN	You'll have to sell your speeder.
LUKE	That's okay.  I'm never coming back to this planet again.
GREEDO	Going somewhere, Solo?
HAN	Yes, Greedo.  As a matter of fact, I was just going to see your boss.  Tell Jabba that I've got his money.
GREEDO	It's too late.  You should have paid him when you had the chance.  Jabba's put a price on your head, so large that every bounty hunter in the galaxy will be looking for you.  I'm lucky I found you first.
HAN	Yeah, but this time I got the money.
GREEDO	If you give it to me, I might forget I found you.
HAN	I don't have it with me.  Tell Jabba...
GREEDO	Jabba's through with you.  He has no time for smugglers who drop their shipments at the first sign of an Imperial cruiser.
HAN	Even I get boarded sometimes.  Do you think I had a choice?
GREEDO	You can tell that to Jabba.  He may only take your ship.
HAN	Over my dead body.
GREEDO	That's the idea I've been looking forward to killing you for a long time.
HAN	Yes, I'll bet you have.
HAN	Sorry about the mess.
VADER	Her resistance to the mind probe is considerable.  It will be some time before we can extract any information from her.
IMPERIAL OFFICER	The final check-out is complete.  All systems are operational.  What course shall we set?
TARKIN	Perhaps she would respond to an alternative form of persuasion.
VADER	What do you mean?
TARKIN	I think it is time we demonstrate the full power of this station.Set your course for Princess Leia's home planet of Alderaan.
TROOPER	With pleasure.
THREEPIO	Lock the door, Artoo.
TROOPER	All right, check that side of the street.  It's secure.  Move on to the next door.
THREEPIO	I would much rather have gone with Master Luke than stay here with you.  I don't know what all this trouble is about, but I'm sure it must be your fault.
THREEPIO	You watch your language!
LUKE	He says it's the best he can do.  Since the XP-38 came out, they 
BEN	It will be enough.
BEN	If the ship's as fast as he's boasting, we ought to do well.
JABBA	Come on out, Solo!
HAN	I've been waiting for you, Jabba.
JABBA	I expected you would be.
HAN	I'm not the type to run.
JABBA	Han, my boy, there are times when you disappoint me... why haven't you paid me?  And why did you have to fry poor Greedo like that... after all we've been through together.
HAN	You sent Greedo to blast me.
JABBA	Han, why you're the best smuggler in the business.  You're too valuable to fry.  He was only relaying my concern at your delays.  He wasn't going to blast you.
HAN	I think he thought he was.  Next time don't send one of those twerps.  If you've got something to say to me, come see me yourself.
JABBA	Han, Han!  If only you hadn't had to dump that shipment of spice... you understand I just can't make an exception.  Where would I be if every pilot who smuggled for me dumped their shipment at the first sign of an Imperial starship?  It's not good business.
HAN	You know, even I get boarded sometimes, Jabba.  I had no choice, but I've gota charter now and I can pay you back, plus a little extra.  I just need some more time.
JABBA	Put your blasters away.  Han, my boy, I'm only doing this because you're the best and I need you.  So, for an extra, say... twenty percent I'll give you a little more time... but this is it.  If you disappoint me again, I'll put a price on your head so large you won't be able to go near a civilized system for the rest of your short life.
HAN	Jabba, I'll pay you because it's my pleasure.
LUKE	What a piece of junk.
HAN	She'll make point five beyond the speed of light.  She may not look like much, but she's got it where it counts, kid.  I've added some special modifications myself.
HAN	We're a little rushed, so if you'll hurry aboard we'll get out of here.
THREEPIO	Hello, sir.
TROOPER	Which way?
TROOPER	All right, men.  Load your weapons!
TROOPER	Stop that ship!
TROOPER	Blast 'em!
HAN	Chewie, get us out of here!
THREEPIO	Oh, my.  I'd forgotten how much I hate space travel.
HAN	It looks like an Imperial cruiser.  Our passengers must be hotter than I thought.  Try and hold them off.  Angle the deflector shield while I make the calculations for the jump to light speed.
HAN	Stay sharp!  There are two more coming in; they're going to try to cut us off.
LUKE	Why don't you outrun them?  I thought you said this thing was fast.
HAN	Watch your mouth, kid, or you're going to find yourself floating home.  We'll be safe enough once we make the jump to hyperspace.  Besides, I know a few maneuvers. We'll lose them!
HAN	Here's where the fun begins!
BEN	How long before you can make the jump to light speed?
HAN	It'll take a few moments to get the coordinates from the navi-computer.
LUKE	Are you kidding?  At the rate they're gaining...
HAN	Traveling through hyperspace isn't like dusting crops, boy!  Without precise calculations we could fly right through a star or bounce too close to a supernova and that'd end your trip real quick, wouldn't it?
LUKE	What's that flashing?
HAN	We're losing our deflector shield.  Go strap yourself in, I'm going to make the jump to light speed.
MOTTI	We've entered the Alderaan system.
LEIA	Governor Tarkin, I should have expected to find you holding Vader's leash.  I recognized your foul stench when I was brought on board.
TARKIN	Charming to the last.  You don't know how hard I found it signing the order to terminate your life!
LEIA	to take the responsibility yourself!
TARKIN	Princess Leia, before your execution I would like you to be my guest at a ceremony that will make this battle station operational.  No star system will dare oppose the Emperor now.
LEIA	The more you tighten your grip, Tarkin, the more star systems will slip through your fingers.
TARKIN	Not after we demonstrate the power of this station.  In a way, you have determined the choice of the planet that'll be destroyed first.  Since you are reluctant to provide us with the location of the Rebel base, I have chosen to test this station's destructive power... on your home planet of Alderaan.
LEIA	No!  Alderaan is peaceful.  We have no weapons.  You can't possibly...
TARKIN	You would prefer another target?  A military target?  Then name the system!
TARKIN	I grow tired of asking this.  So it'll be the last time.  Where is the Rebel base?
LEIA	Dantooine.
LEIA	They're on Dantooine.
TARKIN	There.  You see Lord Vader, she can be reasonable. Continue with the operation.  You may fire when ready.
LEIA	What?
TARKIN	You're far too trusting.  Dantooine is too remote to make an effective demonstration.  But don't worry.  We will deal with your Rebel friends soon enough. 
LEIA	No!
VADER	Commence primary ignition.
LUKE	Are you all right?  What's wrong?
BEN	I felt a great disturbance in the Force... as if millions of voices suddenly cried out in terror and were suddenly silenced.  I fear something terrible has happened.
BEN	You'd better get on with your exercises.
HAN	Well, you can forget your troubles with those Imperial slugs.  I told you I'd outrun 'em.
HAN	Don't everyone thank me at once.
HAN	Anyway, we should be at Alderaan about oh-two-hundred hours.
THREEPIO	Now be careful, Artoo.
THREEPIO	He made a fair move.  Screaming about it won't help you.
HAN	Let him have it. It's not wise to upset a Wookiee.
THREEPIO	But sir, nobody worries about upsetting a droid.
HAN	That's 'cause droids don't pull people's arms out of their socket when they lose.  Wookiees are known to do that.
THREEPIO	I see your point, sir.  I suggest a new strategy, Artoo.  Let the Wookiee win.
BEN	Remember, a Jedi can feel the Force flowing through him.
LUKE	You mean it controls your actions?
BEN	Partially. But it also obeys your commands.
HAN	Hokey religions and ancient weapons are no match for a good blaster at your side, kid.
LUKE	You don't believe in the Force, do you?
HAN	Kid, I've flown from one side of this galaxy to the other.  I've seen a lot of strange stuff, but I've never seen anything to make me believe there's one all-powerful force controlling everything.  There's no mystical energy field that controls my destiny.
HAN	It's all a lot of simple tricks and nonsense.
BEN	I suggest you try it again, Luke.
BEN	This time, let go your conscious self and act on instinct.
LUKE	With the blast shield down, I can't even see.  How am I supposed to fight?
BEN	Your eyes can deceive you.  Don't trust them.
BEN	Stretch out with your feelings.
BEN	You see, you can do it.
HAN	I call it luck. 
BEN	In my experience, there's no such thing as luck.
HAN	Look, going good against remotes is one thing.  Going good against the living?  That's something else.
HAN	Looks like we're coming up on Alderaan.
LUKE	You know, I did feel something.  I could almost see the remote.
BEN	That's good.  You have taken your first step into a larger world.
TARKIN	Yes.
OFFICER CASS	Our scout ships have reached Dantooine.  They found the remains of a Rebel base, but they estimate that it has been deserted for some time.  They are now conducting an extensive search of the surrounding systems.
TARKIN	She lied!  She lied to us!
VADER	I told you she would never consciously betray the Rebellion.
TARKIN	Terminate her... immediately!
HAN	Stand by, Chewie, here we go.  Cut in the sublight engines.
HAN	What the...?  Aw, we've come out of hyperspace into a meteor shower.  Some kind of asteroid collision.  It's not on any of the charts.
LUKE	What's going on?
HAN	Our position is correct, except... no, Alderaan!
LUKE	What do you mean?  Where is it?
HAN	Thats what I'm trying to tell you, kid.  It ain't there.  It's been totally blown away.
LUKE	What?  How?
BEN	Destroyed... by the Empire!
HAN	The entire starfleet couldn't destroy the whole planet.  It'd take a thousand ships with more fire power than I've...
HAN	There's another ship coming in.
LUKE	Maybe they know what happened.
BEN	It's an Imperial fighter.
LUKE	It followed us!
BEN	No.  It's a short range fighter.
HAN	There aren't any bases around here.  Where did it come from?
LUKE	It sure is leaving in a big hurry.  If they identify us, we're in big trouble.
HAN	Not if I can help it.  Chewie... jam it's transmissions.
BEN	It'd be as well to let it go.  It's too far out of range.
HAN	Not for long...
BEN	A fighter that size couldn't get this deep into space on its own.
LUKE	Then he must have gotten lost, been part of a convoy or something...
HAN	Well, he ain't going to be around long enough to tell anyone about us.
LUKE	Look at him.  He's heading for that small moon.
HAN	I think I can get him before he gets there... he's almost in range.
BEN	That's no moon!  It's a space station.
HAN	It's too big to be a space station.
LUKE	I have a very bad feeling about this.
BEN	Turn the ship around!
HAN	Yeah, I think your right.  Full reverse!  Chewie, lock in the auxiliary power.
LUKE	Why are we still moving towards it?
HAN	We're caught in a tractor beam!  It's pulling us in!
LUKE	But there's gotta be something you can do!
HAN	There's nothin' I can do about it, kid.  I'm in full power.  I'm going to have to shut down.  But they're not going to get me without a fight!
BEN	You can't win.  But there are alternatives to fighting.
VOICE OVER DEATH STAR INTERCOM	Clear Bay twenty-three-seven.  We are opening the magnetic field.
OFFICER	To your stations!
OFFICER	Come with me.
OFFICER	Close all outboard shields!  Close all outboard shields!
TARKIN	Yes.
VOICE	We've captured a freighter entering the remains of the Alderaan system.  It's markings match those of a ship that blasted its way out of Mos Eisley.
VADER	They must be trying to return the stolen plans to the princess.  She may yet be of some use to us.
VOICE	Unlock one-five-seven and nine. Release charges.
OFFICER	There's no one on board, sir.  According to the log, the crew abandoned ship right after takeoff.  It must be a decoy, sir.  Several of the escape pods have been jettisoned.
VADER	Did you find any droids?
OFFICER	No, sir.  If there were any on board, they must also have jettisoned.
VADER	Send a scanning crew on board.  I want every part of this ship checked.
OFFICER	Yes, sir.
VADER	I sense something... a presence I haven't felt since...
OFFICER	Get me a scanning crew in here on the double.  I want every part of this ship checked!
LUKE	Boy, it's lucky you had these compartments.
HAN	I use them for smuggling.  I never thought I'd be smuggling myself in them.  This is ridiculous.  Even if I could take off, I'd never get past the tractor beam.
BEN	Leave that to me!
HAN	Damn fool. I knew that you were going to say that!
BEN	Who's the more foolish... the fool or the fool who follows him?
TROOPER	The ship's all yours.  If the scanners pick up anything, report it immediately.  All right, let's go.
HAN'S VOICE	Hey down there, could you give us a hand with this?
GANTRY OFFICER	TX-four-one-two.  Why aren't you at your post?  TX-four-one-two, do you copy? 
GANTRY OFFICER	Take over.  We've got a bad transmitter.  I'll see what I can do.
LUKE	You know, between his howling and your blasting everything in sight, it's a wonder the whole station doesn't know we're here.
HAN	Bring them on!  I prefer a straight fight to all this sneaking around.
THREEPIO	We found the computer outlet, sir.
BEN	Plug in.  He should be able to interpret the entire Imperial computer network.
THREEPIO	He says he's found the main control to the power beam that's holding the ship here.  He'll try to make the precise location appear on the monitor.
THREEPIO	The tractor beam is coupled to the main reactor in seven locations.  A power loss at one of the terminals will allow the ship to leave.
BEN	I don't think you boys can help.  I must go alone.
HAN	Whatever you say.  I've done more than I bargained for on this trip already.
LUKE	I want to go with you.
BEN	Be patient, Luke.  Stay and watch over the droids.
LUKE	But he can...
BEN	They must be delivered safely or other star systems will suffer the same fate as Alderaan.  Your destiny lies along a different path from mine.  The Force will be with you... always!
HAN	Boy you said it, Chewie.
HAN	Where did you dig up that old fossil?
LUKE	Ben is a great man.
HAN	Yeah, great at getting us into trouble.
LUKE	I didn't hear you give any ideas...
HAN	Well, anything would be better than just hanging around waiting for them to pick us up...
LUKE	Who do you think...
LUKE	What is it?
THREEPIO	I'm afraid I'm not quite sure, sir. He says "I found her," and keepsrepeating, "She's here."
LUKE	Well, who... who has he found?
THREEPIO	Princess Leia.
LUKE	The princess?  She's here?
HAN	Princess?
LUKE	Where... where is she?
HAN	Princess?  What's going on?
THREEPIO	Level five. Detention block AA-twenty-three.  I'm afraid she's scheduled to be terminated.
LUKE	Oh, no!  We've got to do something.
HAN	What are you talking about?
LUKE	The droid belongs to her.  She's the one in the message.  We've got to help her.
HAN	Now, look, don't get any funny ideas.  The old man wants us to wait right here.
LUKE	But he didn't know she was here.  Look, will you just find a way back into the detention block?
HAN	I'm not going anywhere.
LUKE	They're going to execute her.  Look, a few minutes ago you said you didn't want to just wait here to be captured.  Now all you want to do is stay. 
HAN	Marching into the detention area is not what I had in mind.
LUKE	But they're going to kill her!
HAN	Better her than me...
LUKE	She's rich.
HAN	Rich?
LUKE	Yes.  Rich, powerful!  Listen, if you were to rescue her, the reward would be...
HAN	What?
LUKE	Well more wealth that you can imagine.
HAN	I don't know, I can imagine quite a bit!
LUKE	You'll get it!
HAN	I better!
LUKE	You will...
HAN	All right, kid.  But you'd better be right about this!
LUKE	All right.
HAN	What's your plan?
LUKE	Uh... Threepio, hand me those binders there will you?
LUKE	Okay.  Now, I'm going to put these on you.
LUKE	Okay.  Han, you put these on.
HAN	Don't worry, Chewie.  I think I know what he has in mind.
THREEPIO	Master Luke, sir!  Pardon me for asking... but, ah... what should Artoo and I do if we're discovered here?
LUKE	Lock the door!
HAN	And hope they don't have blasters.
THREEPIO	That isn't very reassuring.
LUKE	I can't see a thing in this helmet.
HAN	This is not going to work.
LUKE	Why didn't you say so before?
HAN	I did say so before!
OFFICER	Where are you taking this... thing?
LUKE	Prisoner transfer from Block one-one-three-eight.
OFFICER	I wasn't notified.  I'll have to clear it.
HAN	Look out!  He's loose!
LUKE	He's going to pull us all apart.
HAN	Go get him!
HAN	We've got to find out which cell this princess of yours is in.  Here it is... cell twenty-one-eight-seven.  You go get her.  I'll hold them here.
HAN	Everything is under control.  Situation normal.
INTERCOM VOICE	What happened?
HAN	Uh... had a slight weapons malfunction.  But, uh, everything's perfectly all right now.  We're fine.  We're all fine here, now, thank you.  How are you?
INTERCOM VOICE	We're sending a squad up.
HAN	Uh, uh, negative, negative.  We had a reactor leak here now.  Give us a few minutes to lock it down.  Large leak... very dangerous.
INTERCOM VOICE	Who is this?  What's your operating number?
HAN	Boring conversation anyway.Luke!  We're going to have company!
LEIA	Aren't you a little short for a stormtrooper?
LUKE	What?  Oh... the uniform.  I'm Luke Skywalker.  I'm here to rescue you. 
LEIA	You're who?
LUKE	I'm here to rescue you.  I've got your R2 unit.  I'm here with Ben Kenobi.
LEIA	Ben Kenobi is here!  Where is he?
LUKE	Come on!
VADER	He is here...
TARKIN	Obi-Wan Kenobi!  What makes you think so?
VADER	A tremor in the Force.  The last time I felt it was in the presence of my old master.
TARKIN	Surely he must be dead by now.
VADER	Don't underestimate the Force.
TARKIN	The Jedi are extinct, their fire has gone out of the universe.  You, my friend, are all that's left of their religion.
TARKIN	Yes.
INTERCOM VOICE	Governor Tarkin, we have an emergency alert in detention block AA-twenty-three.
TARKIN	The princess!  Put all sections on alert!
VADER	Obi-Wan is here.  The Force is with him.
TARKIN	If you're right, he must not be allowed to escape.
VADER	Escape may not his plan.  I must face him alone.
HAN	Chewie!
HAN	Get behind me!  Get behind me!
HAN	Can't get out that way.
LEIA	Looks like you managed to cut off our only escape route.
HAN	Maybe you'd like it back in your cell, Your Highness.
LUKE	See-Threepio!  See-Threepio!
THREEPIO	Yes sir?
LUKE	We've been cut off!  Are there any other ways out of the cell bay?...What was that?  I didn't copy!
THREEPIO	I said, all systems have been alerted to your presence, sir.  The main entrance seems to be the only way out; all other information on your level is restricted.
TROOPER VOICE	Open up in there!
THREEPIO	Oh, no!
LUKE	There isn't any other way out.
HAN	I can't hold them off forever!  Now what?
LEIA	This is some rescue.  When you came in here, didn't you have a plan for getting out?
HAN	He's the brains, sweetheart.
LUKE	Well, I didn't...
HAN	What the hell are you doing?
LEIA	Somebody has to save our skins.  Into the garbage chute, wise guy.
HAN	Get in there you big furry oaf!  I don't care what you smell!  Get in there and don't worry about it.
HAN	Wonderful girl!  Either I'm going to kill her or I'm beginning to like her.  Get in there!
HAN	Oh!  The garbage chute was a really wonderful idea.  What an incredible smell you've discovered!  Let's get out of here!  Get away from there...
LUKE	No!  wait!
LUKE	Will you forget it?  I already tried it.  It's magnetically sealed!
LEIA	Put that thing away!  You're going to get us all killed.
HAN	Absolutely, Your Worship.  Look, I had everything under control until you led us down here.  You know, it's not going to take them long to figure out what happened to us.
LEIA	It could be worse...
HAN	It's worse.
LUKE	There's something alive in here!
HAN	That's your imagination.
LUKE	Something just moves past my leg!  Look!  Did you see that?
HAN	What?
LUKE	Help!
HAN	Luke!  Luke!  Luke!
LEIA	Luke!
LEIA	Luke, Luke, grab a hold of this.
LUKE	Blast it, will you!  My gun's jammed.
HAN	Where?
LUKE	Anywhere!  Oh!!
HAN	Luke!  Luke!
LEIA	Grab him!
LEIA	What happened?
LUKE	I don't know, it just let go of me and disappeared...
HAN	I've got a very bad feeling about this.
LUKE	The walls are moving!
LEIA	Don't just stand there.  Try and brace it with something.
LUKE	Wait a minute!
LUKE	Threepio!  Come in Threepio!  Threepio!  Where could he be?
FIRST TROOPER	Take over!See to him!  Look there!
THREEPIO	They're madmen!  They're heading for the prison level.  If you hurry, you might catch them.
FIRST OFFICER	Follow me!  You stand guard.
THREEPIO	Come on!
THREEPIO	Oh!  All this excitement has overrun the circuits of my counterpart here.  If you don't mind, I'd like to take him down to maintenance.
TROOPER	All right.
LUKE	Threepio!  Come in, Threepio!  Threepio!
HAN	Get to the top!
LEIA	I can't 
LUKE	Where could he be?  Threepio!  Threepio, will you come in?
THREEPIO	They aren't here!  Something must have happened to them.  See if they've been captured.
THREEPIO	Hurry!
HAN	One thing's for sure.  We're all going to be a lot thinner!Get on top of it!
LEIA	I'm trying!
THREEPIO	Thank goodness, they haven't found them!  Where could they be?
THREEPIO	Use the comlink?  Oh, my!  I forgot I turned it off!
THREEPIO	Are you there, sir?
LUKE	Threepio!
THREEPIO	We've had some problems...
LUKE	Shut down all the garbage mashers on the detention level, will you?  Do you copy?
LUKE	Shut down all the garbage mashers on the detention level.
LUKE	Shut down all the garbage mashers on the detention level.
THREEPIO	No.  Shut them all down!  Hurry!
THREEPIO	Listen to them!  They're dying, Artoo!  Curse my metal body!  I wasn't fast enough.  It's all my fault!  My poor master!
LUKE	Threepio, we're all right!
LUKE	We're all right.  You did great.
LUKE	Hey... hey, open the pressure maintenance hatch on unit number... where are we?
HAN	Three-two-six-eight-two-seven.
HAN	If we can just avoid any more female advice, we ought to be able to get out of here.
LUKE	Well, let's get moving!
HAN	Where are you going?
LEIA	No, wait.  They'll hear!
HAN	Come here, you big coward!
HAN	Chewie!  Come here!
LEIA	Listen. I don't know who you are, or where you came from, but from now on, you do as I tell you.  Okay?
HAN	Look, Your Worshipfulness, let's get one thing straight!  I takeorders from one person!  Me!
LEIA	It's a wonder you're still alive.Will somebody get this big walking carpet out of my way?
HAN	No reward is worth this.
OFFICER	Secure this area until the alert is canceled.
FIRST TROOPER	Give me regular reports.
FIRST TROOPER	Do you know what's going on?
SECOND TROOPER	Maybe it's another drill.
SECOND TROOPER	What was that?
FIRST TROOPER	Oh, it's nothing.  Don't worry about it.
HAN	There she is.
LUKE	See-Threepio, do you copy?
THREEPIO	For the moment.  Uh, we're in the main hangar across from the ship.
LUKE	We're right above you.  Stand by.
LEIA	You came in that thing?  You're braver that I thought.
HAN	Nice!  Come on!
FIRST TROOPER	It's them!  Blast them!
HAN	Get back to the ship!
LUKE	Where are you going?  Come back!
LEIA	He certainly has courage.
LUKE	What good will it do us if he gets himself killed?  Come on!
LUKE	I think we took a wrong turn.
LEIA	There's no lock!
LUKE	That oughta hold it for a while.
LEIA	Quick, we've got to get across.  Find the control that extends the bridge.
LUKE	Oh, I think I just blasted it.
LEIA	They're coming through!
LUKE	Here, hold this.
LEIA	Here they come!
LEIA	For luck!
THREEPIO	Where could they be?
TROOPER	Close the blast doors!
TROOPER	Open the blast doors!  Open the blast doors!
VADER	I've been waiting for you, Obi-Wan.  We meet again, at last.  The circle is now complete.
VADER	When I left you, I was but the learner; now I am the master.
BEN	Only a master of evil, Darth.
VADER	Your powers are weak, old man.
BEN	You can't win, Darth.  If you strike me down, I shall become more powerful than you can possibly imagine.
HAN	Didn't we just leave this party?
HAN	What kept you?
LEIA	We ran into some old friends.
LUKE	Is the ship all right?
HAN	Seems okay, if we can get to it.Just hope the old man got the tractor beam out of commission.
LUKE	Look!
THREEPIO	Come on, Artoo, we're going!
HAN	Now's our chance!  Go!
LUKE	No!
HAN	Come on!
LEIA	Come on!  Luke, its too late!
HAN	Blast the door!  Kid!
BEN'S VOICE	Run, Luke!  Run!
HAN	I hope the old man got that tractor beam out if commission, or this is going to be a real short trip.  Okay, hit it!
HAN	We're coming up on the sentry ships.  Hold 'em off!  Angle the deflector shields while I charge up the main guns!
LUKE	I can't believe he's gone.
LEIA	There wasn't anything you could have done.
HAN	Come on, buddy, we're not out of this yet!
HAN	You in, kid?  Okay, stay sharp!
LEIA	Here they come!
LUKE	They're coming in too fast!
THREEPIO	Oooh!
LEIA	We've lost lateral controls.
HAN	Don't worry, she'll hold together.
HAN	You hear me, baby?  Hold together!
LUKE	Got him!  I got him!
HAN	Great kid!  Don't get cocky.
LEIA	There are still two more of them out there!
LUKE	That's it!  We did it!
LEIA	We did it!
THREEPIO	Help!  I think I'm melting!This is all your fault.
TARKIN	Are they away?
VADER	They have just made the jump into hyperspace.
TARKIN	You're sure the homing beacon is secure aboard their ship?  I'm taking an awful risk, Vader.  This had better work.
HAN	Not a bad bit of rescuing, huh?  You know, sometimes I even amaze myself.
LEIA	That doesn't sound too hard.  Besides, they let us go.  It's the only explanation for the ease of our escape.
HAN	Easy... you call that easy?
LEIA	Their tracking us!
HAN	Not this ship, sister.
LEIA	At least the information in Artoo is still intact.
HAN	What's so important?  What's he carrying?
LEIA	The technical readouts of that battle station.  I only hope that when the data is analyzed, a weakness can be found.  It's not over yet!
HAN	It is for me, sister!  Look, I ain't in this for your revolution, and I'm not in it for you, Princess.  I expect to be well paid.  I'm in it for the money!
LEIA	You needn't worry about your reward.  If money is all that you love, then that's what you'll receive!
LEIA	Your friend is quite a mercenary.  I wonder if he really cares about anything... or anyone.
LUKE	I care!
LUKE	So... what do you think of her, Han?
HAN	I'm trying not to, kid!
LUKE	Good...
HAN	Still, she's got a lot of spirit.  I don't know, what do you think?  Do you think a princess and a guy like me...
LUKE	No!
WILLARD	You're safe!  We had feared the worst.
WILLARD	When we heard about Alderaan, we were afraid that you were... lost along with your father.
LEIA	We don't have time for our sorrows, commander.  The battle station has surely tracked us here.It's the only explanation for the ease of our escape.  You must use the information in this R2 unit to plan the attack.  It is our only hope.
TARKIN	Yes.
DEATH STAR INTERCOM VOICE	We are approaching the planet Yavin.  The Rebel base is on a moon on the far side.  We are preparing to orbit the planet.
DODONNA	The battle station is heavily shielded and carries a firepower greater than half the star fleet.Its defenses are designed around a direct large-scale assault.  A small one-man fighter should be able to penetrate the outer defense.
GOLD LEADER	Pardon me for asking, sir, but what good are snub fighters going to be against that?
DODONNA	Well, the Empire doesn't consider a small one-man fighter to be any threat, or they'd have a tighter defense.  An analysis of the plans provided by Princess Leia has demonstrated a weakness in the battle station.
DODONNA	The approach will not be easy.  You are required to maneuver straight down this trench and skim the surface to this point.  The target area is only two meters wide.  It's a small thermal exhaust port, right below the main port.  The shaft leads directly to the reactor system.  A precise hit will start a chain reaction which should destroy the station.
DODONNA	Only a precise hit will set up a chain reaction.  The shaft is ray-shielded, so you'll have to use proton torpedoes.
WEDGE	That's impossible, even for a computer.
LUKE	It's not impossible.  I used to bullseye womp rats in my T-sixteen back home.  They're not much bigger than two meters.
DODONNA	Man your ships!  And may the Force be with you!
DEATH STAR INTERCOM VOICE	Orbiting the planet at maximum velocity.  The moon with the Rebel base will be in range in thirty minutes.
VADER	This will be a day long remembered.  It has seen the end of Kenobi and it will soon see the end of the Rebellion.
MAN'S VOICE	All flight troops, man your stations.  All flight troops, man your stations.
LUKE	So... you got your reward and you're just leaving then?
HAN	That's right, yeah!  I got some old debts I've got to pay off with this stuff.  Even if I didn't, you don't think I'd be fool enough to stick around here, do you?  Why don't you come with us?  You're pretty good in a fight.  I could use you.
LUKE	Come on!  Why don't you take a look around?  You know what's about to happen, what they're up against.  They could use a good pilot like you.  You're turning your back on them.
HAN	What good's a reward if you ain't around to use it?  Besides, attacking that battle station ain'tmy idea of courage.  It's more like suicide.
LUKE	All right.  Well, take care of yourself, Han... guess that's what you're best at, isn't it?
HAN	Hey, Luke... may the Force be with you!
HAN	What're you lookin' at?  I know what I'm doing.
LEIA	What's wrong?
LUKE	Oh, it's Han!  I don't know, I really thought he'd change his mind. 
LEIA	He's got to follow his own path.  No one can choose it for him.
LUKE	I only wish Ben were here.
BIGGS	Luke!  I don't believe it!  How'd you get here... are you going out with us?!
LUKE	Biggs!  Of course, I'll be up there with you!  Listen, have I got some stories to tell...
RED LEADER	Are you... Luke Skywalker?  Have you been checked out on the Incom T-sixty-five?
BIGGS	Sir, Luke is the best bushpilot in the outer rim territories.
RED LEADER	I met your father once when I was just a boy.  He was a great pilot.  You'll do all right.  If you've got half of your father's skill, you'll do better than all right.
LUKE	Thank you, sir.  I'll try.
BIGGS	I've got to get aboard.  Listen, you'll tell me your stories when we come back.  All right?
LUKE	I told you I'd make it someday, Biggs.
BIGGS	You did, all right.  It's going to be like old times Luke. We're a couple of shooting stars that'll never be stopped!
CHIEF	This R2 unit of your seems a bit beat up.  Do you want a new one?
LUKE	Not on your life!  That little droid and I have been through a lot together.You okay, Artoo?
CHIEF	Okay, easy she goes!
THREEPIO	Hang on tight, Artoo, you've got to come back.
THREEPIO	You wouldn't want my life to get boring, would you?
BEN'S VOICE	Luke, the Force will be with you.
MASSASSI INTERCOM VOICE	Stand-by alert.  Death Star approaching.  Estimated time to firing range, fifteen minutes.
RED LEADER	All wings report in.
RED TEN	Red Ten standing by.
RED SEVEN	Red Seven standing by.
BIGGS	Red Three standing by.
PORKINS	Red Six standing by.
RED NINE	Red Nine standing by.
WEDGE	Red Two standing by.
RED ELEVEN	Red Eleven standing by.
LUKE	Red Five standing by.
RED LEADER	Lock S-foils in attack position.
RED LEADER	We're passing through their magnetic field.
RED LEADER	Hold tight!
RED LEADER	Switch your deflectors on.
RED LEADER	Double front!
WEDGE	Look at the size of that thing!
RED LEADER	Cut the chatter, Red Two.
RED LEADER	Accelerate to attack speed.  This is it, boys!
GOLD LEADER	Red Leader, this is Gold Leader.
RED LEADER	I copy, Gold Leader.
GOLD LEADER	We're starting for the target shaft now.
RED LEADER	We're in position.  I'm going to cut across the axis and try and draw their fire.
WEDGE	Heavy fire, boss!  Twenty-threedegrees.
RED LEADER	I see it.  Stay low. 
LUKE	This is Red Five!  I'm going in!
BIGGS	Luke, pull up!
BIGGS	Are you all right?
LUKE	I got a little cooked, but I'm okay.
ASTRO-OFFICER	We count thirty Rebel ships, Lord Vader.  But they're so small they're evading our turbo-lasers!
VADER	We'll have to destroy them ship to ship.  Get the crews to their fighters.
RED LEADER	Luke, let me know when you're going in.
LUKE	I'm on my way in now...
RED LEADER	Watch yourself!  There's a lot of fire coming from the right side of that deflection tower.
LUKE	I'm on it.
CONTROL OFFICER	Squad leaders, we've picked up a new group of signals.  Enemy fighters coming your way.
LUKE	My scope's negative.  I don't see anything.
RED LEADER	Keep up your visual scanning.  With all this jamming, they'll be on top of you before your scope can pick them up.
RED LEADER	Biggs!  You've picked one up... watch it!
BIGGS	I can't see it!  Where is he?!
BIGGS	He's on me tight, I can't shake him... I can't shake him.
LUKE	Hang on, Biggs, I'm coming in.
LUKE	Got him!
VADER	Several fighters have broken off from the main group.  Come with me!
BIGGS	Pull in!  Luke... pull in!
WEDGE	Watch your back, Luke!
WEDGE	Watch your back!  Fighter's above you, coming in!
LUKE	I'm hit, but not bad.
LUKE'S VOICE	Artoo, see what you can do with it.  Hang on back there.
RED LEADER	Red Six...
RED LEADER	Can you see Red Five?
RED TEN	There's a heavy fire zone on this side. Red Five, where are you?
LUKE	I can't shake him!
WEDGE	I'm on him, Luke!
WEDGE	Hold on!
LUKE	Blast it!  Wedge where are you?
LUKE	Thanks, Wedge.
BIGGS	Good shooting, Wedge!
GOLD LEADER	Red Leader...
GOLD LEADER	... This is Gold Leader.  We're starting out attack run.
RED LEADER	I copy, Gold Leader.  Move into position.
VADER	Stay in attack formation!
GOLD LEADER	The exhaust post is...
GOLD LEADER	... marked and locked in!
GOLD LEADER	Switch power to front deflection screens.
GOLD LEADER	How many guns do you think, Gold Five?
GOLD FIVE	I'd say about twenty guns.  Some on the surface, some on the towers.
MASSASSI INTERCOM VOICE	Death Star will be in range in five minutes. 
GOLD LEADER	Switch to targeting computer.
GOLD TWO	Computer's locked.  Getting a signal.
GOLD TWO	The guns... they've stopped!
GOLD FIVE	Stabilize your rear deflectors.  Watch for enemy fighters.
GOLD LEADER	They've coming in!  Three marks at two ten.
VADER	I'll take them myself!  Cover me!
WINGMAN'S VOICE	Yes, sir.
GOLD LEADER	I can't maneuver!
GOLD FIVE	Stay on target.
GOLD LEADER	We're too close.
GOLD FIVE	Stay on target!
GOLD LEADER	Loosen up!
GOLD FIVE	Gold Five to Red Leader...
GOLD FIVE	Lost Tiree, lost Dutch.
RED LEADER	I copy, Gold Five.
GOLD FIVE	They came from behind....
OFFICER	We've analyzed their attack, sir, and there is a danger.  Should I have your ship standing by?
TARKIN	Evacuate?  In out moment of triumph?  I think you overestimate their chances!
VOICE	Rebel base, three minutes and closing.
RED LEADER	Red Group, this is Red Leader.
RED LEADER	Rendezvous at mark six point one.
WEDGE	This is Red Two.  Flying towards you.
BIGGS	Red Three, standing by.
DODONNA	Red Leader, this is Base One.  Keep half your group out of range for the next run.
RED LEADER'S VOICE	Copy, Base One.  Luke, take Red Two and Three.  Hold up here and wait for my signal... to start your run.
RED LEADER	This is it!
RED TEN	We should be able to see it by now.
RED LEADER	Keep your eyes open for those fighters!
RED TEN	There's too much interference!
RED TEN'S VOICE	Red Five, can you see them from where you are?
LUKE	No sign of any... wait!
LUKE	Coming in point three five.
RED TEN	I see them.
RED LEADER	I'm in range.
RED LEADER	Target's coming up!
RED LEADER	Just hold them off for a few seconds.
VADER	Close up formation.
RED LEADER	Almost there!
RED TEN	You'd better let her loose.
RED LEADER	Almost there!
RED TEN	I can't hold them!
RED LEADER	It's away!
RED NINE'S VOICE	It's a hit!
RED LEADER	Negative.
RED LEADER	Negative!  It didn't go in, it just impacted on the surface.
LUKE	Red Leader, we're right above you.  Turn to point...
LUKE	... oh-five; we'll cover for you.
RED LEADER	Stay there...
RED LEADER	... I just lost my starboard engine.
RED LEADER	Get set up for your attack run.
DEATH STAR INTERCOM VOICE	Rebel base, one minute and closing.
LUKE	Biggs, Wedge, let's close it up.  We're going in.  We're going in full throttle.
WEDGE	Right with you, boss.
BIGGS	Luke, at that speed will you be able to pull out in time?
LUKE	It'll be just like Beggar's Canyon back home.
BIGGS	We'll stay back far enough to cover you.
WEDGE	My scope shows the tower, but I can't see the exhaust port!  Are you sure the computer can hit it?
LUKE	Watch yourself!  Increase speed full throttle!
WEDGE	What about that tower?
LUKE	You worry about those fighters!  I'll worry about the tower!
LUKE	Artoo... that, that stabilizer's broken loose again!  See if you can't lock it down!
WEDGE	I'm hit!  I can't stay with you.
LUKE	Get clear, Wedge.
LUKE	You can't do any more good back there!
WEDGE	Sorry!
VADER	Let him go!  Stay on the leader!
BIGGS	Hurry, Luke, they're coming in much faster this time. I can't hold them!
LUKE	Artoo, try and increase the power!
BIGGS	Hurry up, Luke!
BIGGS	Wait!
DEATH STAR INTERCOM VOICE	Rebel base, thirty seconds and closing.
VADER	I'm on the leader.
THREEPIO	Hang on, Artoo!
BEN'S VOICE	Use the Force, Luke.
BEN'S VOICE	Let go, Luke.
VADER	The Force is strong with this one!
BEN'S VOICE	Luke, trust me.
BASE VOICE	His computer's off.  Luke, you switched off your targeting computer.  What's wrong?
LUKE	Nothing.  I'm all right.
LUKE	I've lost Artoo!
MASSASSI INTERCOM VOICE	The Death Star has cleared the planet.  The Death Star has cleared the planet.
DEATH STAR INTERCOM VOICE	Rebel base, in range.
TARKIN	You may fire when ready.
DEATH STAR INTERCOM VOICE	Commence primary ignition.
VADER	I have you now.
VADER	What?
HAN	Yahoo!
WINGMAN	Look out!
HAN	You're all clear, kid.
HAN	Now let's blow this thing and go home!
INTERCOM VOICE	Stand by to fire at Rebel base.
INTERCOM VOICE	Standing by.
HAN	Great shot, kid.  That was one in a million.
BEN'S VOICE	Remember, the Force will be with you... always.
LEIA	Luke!  Luke!  Luke!
HAN	Hey!  Hey!
LUKE	I knew you'd come back!  I just knew it!
HAN	Well, I wasn't gonna let you get all the credit and take all the reward.
LEIA	Hey, I knew there was more to you than money.
LUKE	Oh, no!
THREEPIO	Oh, my!  Artoo!  Can you hear me?  Say something!You can repair him, can't you?
TECHNICIAN	We'll get to work on him right away.
THREEPIO	You must repair him!  Sir, if any of my circuits or gears will help, I'll gladly donate them.
LUKE	He'll be all right.STAR WARS - EPISODE 6: RETURN OF THE JEDI

SHUTTLE CAPTAIN	 Command station, this is ST 321. Code Clearance Blue. We're starting our approach. Deactivate the security shield.
DEATH STAR CONTROLLER	
(filtered VO)	 The security deflector shield will be deactivated when we have confirmation of your code transmission. Stand by... You are clear to proceed.
SHUTTLE CAPTAIN	 We're starting our approach.
OFFICER	 Inform the commander that Lord Vader's shuttle has arrived.
OPERATOR	 Yes, sir.
JERJERROD	 Lord Vader, this is an unexpected pleasure.  We're honored by your presence.
VADER	 You may dispense with the pleasantries, Commander. I'm here to put you back on schedule.
JERJERROD	 I assure you, Lord Vader, my men are working as fast as they can.
VADER	 Perhaps I can find new ways to motivate them.
JERJERROD	 I tell you, this station will be operational as planned.
VADER	 The Emperor does not share your optimistic appraisal of the situation.
JERJERROD	 But he asks the impossible. I need more men.
VADER	 Then perhaps you can tell him when he arrives.
JERJERROD (aghast)	 The Emperor's coming here?
VADER	 That is correct, Commander. And he is most displeased with your apparent lack of progress.
JERJERROD	 We shall double our efforts.
VADER	 I hope so, Commander, for your sake. The Emperor is not as forgiving as I am.
THREEPIO	 Of course I'm worried. And you should be, too. Lando Calrissian and poor Chewbacca never returned from this awful place.
THREEPIO	 Don't be so sure. If I told you half the things I've heard about this Jabba the Hutt, You'd probably short-circuit.
THREEPIO	 Artoo, are you sure this is the right place? I better knock, I suppose.
THREEPIO (instantly)	 There doesn't seem to be anyone there. Let's go back and tell Master Luke.
STRANGE VOICE	 Tee chuta hhat yudd!
THREEPIO	 Goodness gracious me!
THREEPIO	 Artoo Detoowha bo Seethreepiowha ey toota odd mischka Jabba du Hutt.
THREEPIO	 I don't think they're going to let us in, Artoo. We'd better go.
THREEPIO	 Artoo, wait. Oh, dear! Artoo. Artoo, I really don't think we should rush into all this.
THREEPIO	 Oh, Artoo!  Artoo, wait for me!
THREEPIO	 Just you deliver Master Luke's message and get us out of here. Oh my! Oh! Oh, no.
BIB	 Die Wanna Wanga!
THREEPIO	 Oh, my! Die Wanna Wauaga. We -- we bring a message to your master, Jabba the Hutt.
THREEPIO (cont)	 ... and a gift. (thinks a moment, then to Artoo) Gift, what gift?
BIB	 Nee Jabba no badda. Me chaade su goodie.
THREEPIO	 He says that our instructions are to give it only to Jabba himself.
THREEPIO	 I'm terribly sorry. I'm afraid he's ever so stubborn about these sort of things.
BIB	 Nudd Chaa.
THREEPIO	 Artoo, I have a bad feeling about this.
THREEPIO	 Good morning.
JABBA	 Bo Shuda!
THREEPIO	 The message, Artoo, the message.
LUKE	 Greetings, Exalted One. Allow me to introduce myself. I am Luke Skywalker, Jedi Knight and friend to Captain Solo. I know that you are powerful, mighty Jabba, and that your anger with Solo must be equally powerful. I seek an audience with Your Greatness to bargain for Solo's life. (Jabba's crowd laughs) With your wisdom, I'm sure that we can work out an arrangement which will be mutually beneficial and enable us to avoid any unpleasant confrontation. As a token of my goodwill, I present to you a gift: these two droids.
THREEPIO	 What did he say?
LUKE (cont)	 ... Both are hardworking and will serve you well.
THREEPIO	 This can't be! Artoo, you're playing the wrong message.
JABBA (in Huttese subtitled)	 There will be no bargain.
THREEPIO	 We're doomed.
JABBA (in Huttese subtitled)	 I will not give up my favorite decoration. I like Captain Solo where he is.
THREEPIO	 Artoo, look! Captain Solo. And he's still frozen in carbonite.
THREEPIO	 What could possibly have come over Master Luke. Is it something I did? He never expressed any unhappiness with my work. Oh! Oh! Hold it! Ohh!
NINEDENINE	 Ah, good. New acquisitions. You are a protocol droid, are you not?
THREEPIO	 I am See-Threepio, human-cy...
NINEDENINE	 Yes or no will do.
THREEPIO	 Oh. Well, yes.
NINEDENINE	 How many languages do you speak?
THREEPIO	 I am fluent in over six million forms of communication, and can readily...
NINEDENINE	 Splendid! We have been without an interpreter since our master got angry with our last protocol droid and disintegrated him.
THREEPIO	 Disintegrated?
NINEDENINE (to a Gamorrean guard)	 Guard! This protocol droid might be useful. Fit him with a restraining bolt and take him back to His Excellency's main audience chamber.
THREEPIO (disappearing)	 Artoo, don't leave me! Ohhh!
NINEDENINE	 You're a feisty little one, but you'll soon learn some respect. I have need for you on the master's Sail Barge. And I think you'll fit in nicely.
JABBA	 Da Eitha!
OOLA	 Na Chuba negatorie Na! Na! Natoota...
JABBA	 Boscka!
BOUSHH (in Ubese subtitled)	 I have come for the bounty on this Wookiee.
THREEPIO	 Oh, no! Chewbacca!
JABBA (in Huttese subtitled)	 At last we have the mighty Chewbacca.
THREEPIO	 Oh, uh, yes, uh, I am here, Your Worshipfulness. Uh... yes!
THREEPIO	 Oh. The illustrious Jabba bids you welcome and will gladly pay you the reward of twenty- five thousand.
BOUSHH (in Ubese subtitled)	 I want fifty thousand. No less.
THREEPIO	 Uh, oh... but what, what did I say? (to Boushh) Uh, the mighty Jabba asks why he must pay fifty thousand.
THREEPIO	 Because he's holding a thermal detonator.
JABBA (in Huttese subtitled)	 This bounty hunter is my kind of scum. Fearless and inventive.
THREEPIO	 Jabba offers the sum of thirty-five. And I suggest you take it.
BOUSHH	 Zeebuss.
THREEPIO	 He agrees!
BOUSHH	 Just relax for a moment. You're free of the carbonite.
BOUSHH	 Shhh. You have hibernation sickness.
HAN	 I can't see.
BOUSHH	 You eyesight will return in time.
HAN	 Where am I?
BOUSHH	 Jabba's palace.
HAN	 Who are you?
LEIA	 Someone who loves you.
HAN	 Leia!
LEIA	 I gotta get you out of here.
HAN	 What's that? I know that laugh.
HAN	 Hey, Jabba. Look, Jabba, I was just on my way to pay you back, but I got a little sidetracked. It's not my fault.
JABBA (in Huttese subtitled)	 It's too late for that, Solo. You may have been a good smuggler, but now you're Bantha fodder.
HAN	 Look...
JABBA (cont Huttese subtitled)	 Take him away!
HAN	 Jabba... I'll pay you triple! You're throwing away a fortune here. Don't be a fool!
JABBA (in Huttese subtitled)	 Bring her to me.
LEIA	 We have powerful friends. You're gonna regret this...
JABBA (in Huttese subtitled)	 I'm sure.
LEIA	 Ugh!
THREEPIO	 Ohhh, I can't bear to watch.
HAN	 Chewie? Chewie, is that you?
HAN	 Ah! Chew--Chewie!
HAN	 Wait. I can't see, pal. What's goin' on?
HAN	 Luke? Luke's crazy. He can't even take care of himself, much less rescue anybody.
HAN	 A...Jedi Knight? I--I'm out of it for a little while, everybody gets delusions of grandeur.
HAN	 I'm all right, pal. I'm all right.
LUKE	 I must speak with Jabba.
LUKE	 You will take me to Jabba now!
LUKE	 You serve your master well.
LUKE	 And you will be rewarded.
THREEPIO	 At last! Master Luke's come to rescue me.
BIB	 Master.
BIB	 ...Luke Skywalker, Jedi Knight.
JABBA (in Huttese subtitled)	 I told you not to admit him.
LUKE	 I must be allowed to speak.
BIB (in Huttese subtitled)	 He must be allowed to speak.
JABBA (in Huttese subtitled)	 You weak-minded fool! He's using an old Jedi mind trick.
LUKE	 You will bring Captain Solo and the Wookiee to me.
JABBA (in Huttese subtitled)	 Your mind powers will not work on me, boy.
LUKE	 Nevertheless, I'm taking Captain Solo and his friends. You can either profit by this... or be destroyed! It's your choice. But I warn you not to underestimate my powers.
THREEPIO	 Master Luke, you're standing on...
JABBA (in Huttese subtitled)	 There will be no bargain, young Jedi. I shall enjoy watching you die.
JABBA	 Bascka!
THREEPIO	 Oh, no! The Rancor!
JABBA (in Huttese subtitled)	 Bring me Solo and the Wookiee. They will all suffer for this outrage.
LUKE	 Han!
HAN	 Luke!
LUKE	 Are you all right?
HAN	 Fine. Together again, huh?
LUKE	 Wouldn't miss it.
HAN	 How are we doing?
LUKE	 The same as always.
HAN	 That bad, huh? Where's Leia?
LEIA	 I'm here.
THREEPIO	 Oh, dear. His High Exaltedness, the great Jabba the Hutt, has decreed that you are to be terminated immediately.
HAN	 Good, I hate long waits.
THREEPIO	 You will therefore be taken to the Dune Sea and cast into the pit of Carkoon, the nesting place of the all-powerful Sarlacc.
HAN (to Luke)	 Doesn't sound so bad.
THREEPIO	 In his belly, you will find a new definition of pain and suffering, as you are slowly digested over a thousand years.
HAN	 On second thought, let's pass on that, huh?
LUKE	 You should have bargained, Jabba. That's the last mistake you'll ever make.
HAN	 I think my eyes are getting better. Instead of a big dark blur, I see a big light blur.
LUKE	 There's nothing to see. I used to live here, you know.
HAN	 You're gonna die here, you know. Convenient.
LUKE	 Just stick close to Chewie and Lando. I've taken care of everything.
HAN	 Oh... great!
JABBA (in Huttese subtitled)	 Soon you will learn to appreciate me.
THREEPIO	 Oh, I'm terribly sor... Artoo! What are you doing here?
THREEPIO	 Well, I can see you're serving drinks, but this place is dangerous. They're going to execute Master Luke and, if we're not careful, us too!
THREEPIO	 Hmm.  I wish I had your confidence.
THREEPIO	 Victims of the almighty Sarlacc: His Excellency hopes that you will die honorably. But should any of you wish to beg for mercy, the great Jabba the Hutt will now listen to your pleas.
HAN	 Threepio, you tell that slimy piece of... worm-ridden filth he'll get no such pleasure from us. Right?
LUKE	 Jabba! This is your last chance. Free us or die.
JABBA (in Huttese subtitled)	 Move him into position.
JABBA (in Huttese subtitled)	 Put him in.
LUKE	 Easy, Chewie.
LANDO	 Whoa! Whoa! Help!
HAN	 Chewie, you okay? Where is he?
HAN	 I'm okay, pal.
LANDO	 Han! Chewie?
HAN	 Lando!
HAN	 Boba Fett?! Boba Fett?! Where?
HAN	 Lando, grab it!
LANDO	 Lower it!
HAN	 I'm trying!
HAN	 Whoa! Whoa! Grab me, Chewie! I'm slipping.
HAN	 Grab it! L--Lando. Grab!
HAN	 Grab it! Almost... You almost got it!
LANDO	 Hold it! Whoa!
HAN	 Gently now. All... all right. Now easy, easy. Hold me, Chewie.
HAN	 Chewie! Chewie, give me the gun. Don't move, Lando.
LANDO	 No, wait! I thought you were blind!
HAN	 It's all right. Trust me. Don't move.
LANDO	 All right! A little higher! Just a little higher!
HAN	 Chewie, Pull us up! Come on! Okay... up, Chewie, up!
LEIA	 Come on. We gotta get out of here quick.
THREEPIO	 Not my eyes! Artoo, help! Quickly, Artoo. Oh! Ohhh! You beast!
LUKE (to Leia)	 Get the gun! Point it at the deck!
LUKE	 Point it at the deck!
THREEPIO	 Artoo, where are we going? I couldn't possibly jump.
LUKE	 Come on!
LUKE	 Let's go! And don't forget the droids.
LANDO	 We're on our way.
HAN	 I don't know. All I can see is a lot of blowing sand!
LEIA	 That's all any of us can see.
HAN (blinking)	 Then I guess I'm getting better.
HAN (turning to Luke)	 I've got to hand it to you, kid, you were pretty good out there.
LUKE (shrugging it off)	 I had a lot of help. Think nothing of it.
HAN	 No, I'm thinking a lot about it. That carbon freeze was the closest thing to dead there is. And it wasn't just sleepin'. It was a big wide awake nothing!
LUKE (moving to his ship)	 I'll see you back at the fleet.
HAN	 Why don't you leave that crate and come with us?
LUKE	 I have a promise I have to keep first... to an old friend.
HAN	 (looking dubiously at Lando, obviously remembering his friend's betrayal and subsequent aide) Guess I owe you some thanks, too, Lando.
LANDO	 Figured if I left you frozen like that you'd just give me bad luck the rest of my life, so I might as well get you unfrozen sooner or later.
LEIA	 He means "You're welcome."
LANDO	 Come on, let's get off this miserable dust ball.
LUKE	 I'll meet you back at the fleet.
LEIA (over comlink)	 Hurry. The Alliance should be assembled by now.
LUKE	 I will.
HAN (over comlink)	 Hey, Luke, thanks. Thanks for comin' after me. Now I owe you one.
LUKE	 That's right, Artoo. We're going to the  Dagobah system. I have a promise to keep...  to an old friend.
EMPEROR (to Vader)	 Rise, my friend.
VADER	 The Death Star will be completed on schedule.
EMPEROR	 You have done well, Lord Vader. And now I sense you wish to continue your search for young Skywalker.
VADER	 Yes, my Master.
EMPEROR	 Patience, my friend. In time he will seek you out. And when he does, you must bring him before me. He has grown strong. Only together can we turn him to the dark side of the Force.
VADER	 As you wish.
EMPEROR	 Everything is proceeding as I have foreseen.
YODA	 Hmm. That face you make. Look I so old to young eyes?
LUKE	 No... of course not.
YODA (tickled, chuckles)	 I do, yes, I do!  Sick have I become. Old and weak. (Points a crooked finger) When nine hundred years old you reach, look as good you will not. Hmm?
YODA	 Soon will I rest. Yes, forever sleep. Earned it, I have.
LUKE	 Master Yoda, you can't die.
YODA	 Strong am I with the Force... but not that strong! Twilight is upon me and soon night must fall. That is the way of things ... the way of the Force.
LUKE	 But I need your help. I've come back to complete the training.
YODA	 No more training do you require. Already know you that which you need.
LUKE	 Then I am a Jedi?
YODA (shakes his head)	 Ohhh. Not yet. One thing remains: Vader. You must confront Vader. Then, only then, a Jedi will you be. And confront him you will.
LUKE	 Master Yoda... is Darth Vader my father?
YODA	 Mmm... rest I need. Yes... rest.
LUKE	 Yoda, I must know.
YODA	 Your father he is.
YODA	 Told you, did he?
LUKE	 Yes.
YODA	 Unexpected this is, and unfortunate..
LUKE	 Unfortunate that I know the truth?
YODA (gathering all his strength)	 No. Unfortunate that you rushed to face him... that incomplete was your training. Not ready for the burden were you.
LUKE	 Well, I'm sorry.
YODA	 Remember, a Jedi's strength flows from the Force.  But beware.  Anger, fear, aggression. The dark side are they.  Once you start down the dark path, forever will it dominate your destiny.
YODA	 Luke...Luke...Do not...Do not underestimate the powers of the Emperor, or suffer your father's fate, you will. Luke, when gone am I (cough), the last of the Jedi will you be. Luke, the Force runs strong in your family. Pass on what you have learned, Luke... (with great effort) There is... another...Sky...Sky...walker.
LUKE	 I can't do it, Artoo. I can't go on alone.
BEN (OS)	 Yoda will always be with you.
LUKE	 Obi-Wan! Why didn't you tell me?
LUKE	 You told me Vader betrayed and murdered my father.
BEN	 You father was seduced by the dark side of the Force. He ceased to be Anakin Skywalker and became Darth Vader. When that happened, the good man who was your father was destroyed. So what I have told you was true... from a certain point of view.
LUKE (turning away, derisive)	 A certain point of view!
BEN	 Luke, you're going to find that many of the truths we cling to depend greatly on our own point of view.
BEN	 I don't blame you for being angry. If I was wrong in what I did, it certainly wouldn't have been for the first time. You see, what happened to your father was my fault.
BEN	 Anakin was a good friend.
BEN	 When I first knew him, your father was already a great pilot. But I was amazed how strongly the Force was with him.  I took it upon myself to train him as a Jedi.  I thought that I could instruct him just as well as Yoda.  I was wrong.  My pride has had terrible consequences for the galaxy.
LUKE	 There's still good in him.
BEN	 I also thought he could be turned back to the good side. It couldn't be done. He is more machine now than man. Twisted and evil.
LUKE	 I can't do it, Ben.
BEN	 You cannot escape your destiny.
LUKE	 I tried to stop him once. I couldn't do it.
BEN	 Vader humbled you when first you met him, Luke...but that experience was part of your training. It taught you, among other things, the value of patience.  Had you not been so impatient to defeat Vader then, you could have finished your training here with Yoda. You would have been prepared.
LUKE	 But I had to help my friends.
BEN (grinning at Luke's indignation)	 And did you help them? It was they who had to save you. You achieved little by rushing back prematurely, I fear.
LUKE (with sadness)	 I found out Darth Vader was my father.
BEN	 To be a Jedi, Luke, you must confront and then go beyond the dark side - the side your father couldn't get past. Impatience is the easiest door - for you, like your father. Only, your father was seduced by what he found on the other side of the door, and you have held firm. You're no longer so reckless now, Luke. You are strong and patient. And now, you must face Darth Vader again!
LUKE	 I can't kill my own father.
BEN	 Then the Emperor has already won. You were our only hope.
LUKE	 Yoda spoke of another.
BEN	 The other he spoke of is your twin sister.
LUKE	 But I have no sister.
BEN	 Hmm. To protect you both from the Emperor, you were hidden from your father when you were born. The Emperor knew, as I did, if Anakin were to have any offspring, they would be a threat to him. That is the reason why your sister remains safely anonymous.
LUKE	 Leia! Leia's my sister.
BEN	 Your insight serves you well. Bury your feelings deep down, Luke. They do you credit. But they could be made to serve the Emperor.
BEN (continuing his narrative)	 When your father left, he didn't know your mother was pregnant. Your mother and I knew he would find out eventually, but we wanted to keep you both as safe as possible, for as long as possible.  So I took you to live with my brother Owen on Tatooine... and your mother took Leia to live as the daughter of Senator Organa, on Alderaan.
BEN (attempting to give solace with his words)	 The Organa household was high-born and politically quite powerful in that system. Leia became a princess by virtue of lineage... no one knew she'd been adopted, of course. But it was a title without real power, since Alderaan had long been a democracy.  Even so, the family continued to be politically powerful, and Leia, following in her foster father's path, became a senator as well.  That's not all she became, of course... she became the leader of her cell in the Alliance against the corrupt Empire. And because she had diplomatic immunity, she was a vital link for getting information to the Rebel cause.  That's what she was doing when her path crossed yours... for her foster parents had always told her to contact me on Tatooine, if her troubles became desperate.
LUKE	 But you can't let her get involved now, Ben. Vader will destroy her.
BEN	 She hasn't been trained in the ways of the Jedi the way you have, Luke ... but the Force is strong with her, as it is with all of your family. There is no avoiding the battle. You must face and destroy Vader!
HAN	 Well, look at you, a general, huh?
LANDO	 Oh, well, someone must have told them about my little maneuver at the battle of Taanab.
HAN (sarcastic)	 Well, don't look at me, pal. I just said you were a fair pilot. I didn't know they were lookin' for somebody to lead this crazy attack.
LANDO (smiling)	 I'm surprised they didn't ask you to do it.
HAN	 Well, who says they didn't.  But I ain't crazy. You're the respectable one, remember?
MON MOTHMA	 The Emperor has made a critical error and the time for our attack has come.
MON MOTHMA	 The data brought to us by the Bothan spies pinpoints the exact location of the Emperor's new battle station. We also know that the weapon systems of this Death Star are not yet operational. With the Imperial Fleet spread throughout the galaxy in a vain effort to engage us, it is relatively unprotected. But most important of all, we've learned that the Emperor himself is personally overseeing the final stages of the construction of this Death Star.
MON MOTHMA (cont)	 Many Bothans died to bring us this information. Admiral Ackbar, please.
ACKBAR	 You can see here the Death Star orbiting the forest Moon of Endor. Although the weapon systems on this Death Star are not yet operational, the Death Star does have a strong defense mechanism. It is protected by an energy shield, which is generated from the nearby forest Moon of Endor. The shield must be deactivated if any attack is to be attempted. Once the shield is down, our cruisers will create a perimeter, while the fighters fly into the superstructure and attempt to knock out the main reactor.
ACKBAR (cont)	 General Calrissian has volunteered to lead the fighter attack
HAN	 Good luck.
HAN	 You're gonna need it.
ACKBAR	 General Madine.
GENERAL MADINE	 We have stolen a small Imperial shuttle. Disguised as a cargo ship, and using a secret Imperial code, a strike team will land on the moon and deactivate the shield generator.
THREEPIO	 Sounds dangerous.
LEIA (to Han)	 I wonder who they found to pull that off.
GENERAL MADINE	 General Solo, is your strike team assembled?
HAN	 Uh, my team's ready. I don't have a command crew for the shuttle.
HAN	 Well, it's gonna be rough, pal. I didn't want to speak for you.
HAN (smiles)	 That's one.
LEIA	 Uh, General... count me in.
VOICE (OS)	 I'm with you, too!
LEIA	 What is it?
LUKE (hesitant)	 Ask me again sometime.
HAN	 Luke.
LUKE	 Hi, Han... Chewie.
THREEPIO	 "Exciting" is hardly the word I would use.
HAN	 Look. I want you to take her. I mean it. Take her. You need all the help you can get. She's the fastest ship in the fleet.
LANDO	 All right, old buddy. You know, I know what she means to you. I'll take good care of her. She-she won't get a scratch. All right?
HAN (looks at him warmly)	 Right. I got your promise now. Not a scratch.
LANDO	 Look, would you get going, you pirate.
LANDO	 Good luck.
HAN	 You, too.
HAN	 You got her warmed?
LUKE	 Yeah, she's comin' up.
HAN	 No. I don't think the Empire had Wookiees in mind when they designed her, Chewie.
LEIA	 Hey, are you awake?
HAN	 Yeah, I just got a funny feeling. Like I'm not gonna see her again.
LEIA (softly)	 Come on, General, let's move.
HAN	 Right. Chewie, let's see what this piece of junk can do. Ready, everybody?
LUKE	 All set.
THREEPIO	 Here we go again.
HAN	 All right, hang on.
VADER	 What is thy bidding, my Master?
EMPEROR	 Send the fleet to the far side of Endor. There it will stay until called for.
VADER	 What of the reports of the Rebel fleet massing near Sullust?
EMPEROR	 It is of no concern. Soon the Rebellion will be crushed and young Skywalker will be one of us! Your work here is finished, my friend. Go out to the command ship and await my orders.
VADER	 Yes, my Master.
HAN	 If they don't go for this, we're gonna have to get outta here pretty quick, Chewie.
CONTROLLER (over radio)	 We have you on our screen now. Please identify.
HAN	 Shuttle Tydirium requesting deactivation of the deflector shield.
CONTROLLER (over radio)	 Shuttle Tydirium, transmit the clearance code for shield passage.
HAN	 Transmission commencing.
LEIA	 Now we find out if that code is worth the price we paid.
HAN	 It'll work. It'll work.
LUKE	 Vader's on that ship.
HAN	 Now don't get jittery, Luke. There are a lot of command ships. Keep your distance though, Chewie, but don't look like you're trying to keep your distance.
HAN	 I don't know.  Fly casual.
LUKE	 I'm endangering the mission. I shouldn't have come.
HAN	 It's your imagination, kid. Come on. Let's keep a little optimism here.
VADER	 Where is that shuttle going?
PIETT (into comlink)	 Shuttle Tydirium, what is your cargo and destination?
PILOT VOICE (HAN)(filtered)	 Parts and technical crew for the forest moon.
VADER	 Do they have a code clearance?
PIETT	 It's an older code, sir, but it checks out. I was about to clear them.
PIETT	 Shall I hold them?
VADER	 No. Leave them to me. I will deal with them myself.
PIETT (surprised)	 As you wish, my lord. (to controller) Carry on.
HAN	 They're not goin' for it, Chewie.
CONTROLLER (filtered)	 Shuttle Tydirium, deactivation of the shield will commence immediately. Follow your present course.
HAN	 Okay! I told you it was gonna work. No problem.
THREEPIO	 Oh, I told you it was dangerous here.
LEIA	 Shall we try and go around?
HAN	 It'll take time. This whole party'll be for nothing if they see us.
HAN	 Chewie and I will take care of this. You stay here.
LUKE	 Quietly, there might be more of them out there.
HAN (grins)	 Hey... it's me.
SCOUT #1	 Go for help! Go!
LUKE (sarcastic)	 Great. Come on.
LEIA	 Over there! Two more of them!
LUKE	 I see them. Wait, Leia!
LUKE (pointing to the controls)	 Quick! Jam their comlink. Center switch!
HAN	 Hey, wait! Ahhh!
LUKE	 Move closer!
LUKE	 Get alongside that one!
LUKE	 Get him!
LUKE (indicating the one ahead)	 Keep on that one! I'll take these two!
THREEPIO	 Oh, General Solo, somebody's coming. Oh!
HAN	 Luke! Where's Leia?
LUKE (concerned)	 What? She didn't come back?
HAN	 I thought she was with you.
LUKE	 We got separated.
LUKE	 Hey, we better go look for her.
HAN	 Take the squad ahead.  We'll meet at the shield generator at 0300.
LUKE	 Come on, Artoo.  We'll need your scanners.
THREEPIO	 Don't worry, Master Luke.  We know what to do.
THREEPIO (to Artoo)	 And you said it was pretty here. Ugh!
LEIA	 Cut it out!
LEIA	 I'm not gonna hurt you.
LEIA	 Well, looks like I'm stuck here. Trouble is, I don't know where here is.
LEIA	 Well, maybe you can help me. Come on, sit down.
LEIA	 I promise I won't hurt you. Now come here.
LEIA	 All right. You want something to eat?
LEIA	 That's right. Come on. Hmmm?
LEIA	 Look, it's a hat. It's not gonna hurt you. Look. You're a jittery little thing, aren't you?
LEIA	 What is it?
SCOUT #l	 Freeze!  Come on, get up!
SCOUT #1	 Go get your ride and take her back to base.
SCOUT #2	 Yes, sir.
LEIA	 Come on, let's get outta here.
GUARD	 Halt! The Emperor does not wish to be disturbed at the moment.
VADER	 (raising his gloved hand to the two guards and choking them with the Force) The Emperor will see me, now!
GUARD	 (repeating Vader's command) The Emperor will see you, now.
EMPEROR	 I told you to remain on the command ship.
VADER	 A small Rebel force has penetrated the shield and landed on Endor.
EMPEROR (no surprise)	 Yes, I know.
VADER (after a beat)	 My son is with them.
EMPEROR (very cool)	 Are you sure?
VADER	 I have felt him, my Master.
EMPEROR	 Strange, that I have not. I wonder if your feelings on this matter are clear, Lord Vader.
VADER	 They are clear, my Master.
EMPEROR	 Then you must go to the Sanctuary Moon and wait for them.
VADER (skeptical)	 He will come to me?
EMPEROR	 I have foreseen it. His compassion for you will be his undoing. He will come to you and then you will bring him before me.
VADER (bows)	 As you wish.
HAN (OS)	 Luke! Luke!
THREEPIO	 Oh, Master Luke.
LUKE	 There's two more wrecked speeders back there. And I found this.
THREEPIO	 I'm afraid that Artoo's sensors can find no trace of Princess Leia.
HAN (gravely)	 I hope she's alright.
HAN	 What, Chewie? What? Chewie!
HAN	 Hey, I don't get it.
HAN (cont)	 Nah, it's just a dead animal, Chewie.
LUKE	 Chewie, wa-wait!  Don't!
HAN	 Nice work. Great, Chewie! Great! Always thinking with your stomach.
LUKE	 Will you take it easy? Let's just figure out a way to get out of this thing. (trying to free an arm) Han, can you reach my lightsaber?
HAN	 Yeah, sure.
THREEPIO	 Artoo, I'm not sure that's such a good idea. It's a very long dro-o-op!!
HAN	 Wha--?  Hey!  Point that thing someplace else.
HAN	 Hey!
LUKE	 Han, don't. It'll be all right.
LUKE	 Chewie, give 'em your crossbow.
THREEPIO	 Oh, my head. Oh, my goodness!
LUKE	 Do you understand anything they're saying?
THREEPIO	 Oh, yes, Master Luke!  Remember that I am fluent in over six million forms of communication.
HAN	 What are you telling them?
THREEPIO	 Hello, I think... I could be mistaken. They're using a very primitive dialect.  But I do believe they think I am some sort of god.
HAN	 Well, why don't you use your divine influence and get us out of this?
THREEPIO	 I beg your pardon, General Solo, but that just wouldn't be proper.
HAN	 Proper?!
THREEPIO	 It's against my programming to impersonate a deity.
HAN	 Why, you--
HAN	 My mistake. He's an old friend of mine.
HAN	 I have a really bad feeling about this.
HAN	 What did he say?
THREEPIO	 I'm rather embarrassed, General Solo, but it appears you are to be the main course at a banquet in my honor.
HAN and LUKE	 Leia!
LEIA	 Oh!
THREEPIO	 Your Royal Highness.
LEIA	 But these are my friends. Threepio, tell them they must be set free.
HAN	 Somehow, I got the feeling that didn't help us very much.
LUKE	 Threepio, tell them if they don't do as you wish, you'll become angry and use your magic.
THREEPIO	 But Master Luke, what magic? couldn't possibly --
LUKE	 Just tell them.
THREEPIO	 You see, Master Luke; they didn't believe me. Just...
THREEPIO	 ... as I said they wouldn't. Wha-wha-what's happening! Oh! Oh, dear! Oh!
THREEPIO	 Put me down! He-e-elp! Master Luke! Artoo! Somebody, somebody, help! Master Luke, Artoo! Artoo, quickly! Do something, somebody! Oh! Ohhh!
THREEPIO	 Oh, oh, oh, oh! Thank goodness.
LUKE	 Thanks, Threepio.
THREEPIO (still shaken)	 I...I never knew I had it in me.
THREEPIO	 Yes, Artoo. I was just coming to that.
HAN	 What's going on?
LEIA	 I don't know.
THREEPIO	 Wonderful! We are now a part of the tribe.
HAN	 Just what I always wanted.
HAN (chuckles)	 Well, short help is better than no help at all, Chewie. (to Wicket) Thank you. Okay.
THREEPIO	 He says the scouts are going to show us the quickest way to the shield generator.
HAN	 Good. How far is it? Ask him. We need some fresh supplies, too. And try and get our weapons back.
HAN (cont)	 And hurry up, will ya? I haven't got all day.
LUKE	 Luke, what's wrong?
LUKE	 Leia... do you remember your mother? Your real mother?
LEIA	 Just a little bit. She died when I was very young.
LUKE	 What do you remember?
LEIA	 Just...images, really. Feelings.
LUKE	 Tell me.
LEIA	 (a little surprised at his insistence) She was very beautiful. Kind, but...sad. (looks up) Why are you asking me all this?
LUKE	 I have no memory of my mother. I never knew her.
LEIA	 Luke, tell me. What's troubling you?
LUKE	 Vader is here...now, on this moon.
LEIA (alarmed)	 How do you know?
LUKE	 I felt his presence. He's come for me. He can feel when I'm near. That's why I have to go. (facing her) As long as I stay, I'm endangering the group and our mission here. (beat) I have to face him.
LEIA	 Why?
LUKE	 He's my father.
LEIA	 Your father?
LUKE	 There's more. It won't be easy for you to hear it, but you must. If I don't make it back, you're the only hope for the Alliance.
LEIA	 Luke, don't talk that way. You have a power I--I don't understand and could never have.
LUKE	 You're wrong, Leia. You have that power too. In time you'll learn to use it as I have. The Force is strong in my family. My father has it...I have it...and...my sister has it.
LUKE	 Yes. It's you Leia.
LEIA	 I know. Somehow...I've always known.
LUKE	 Then you know why I have to face him.
LEIA	 No! Luke, run away, far away. If he can feel your presence, then leave this place. I wish I could go with you.
LUKE	 No, you don't. You've always been strong.
LEIA	 But, why must you confront him?
LUKE	 Because...there is good in him. I've felt it. He won't turn me over to the Emperor. I can save him. I can turn him back to the good side. I have to try.
HAN	 Hey, what's goin' on?
LEIA	 Nothing. I - just want to be alone for a little while.
HAN (angry)	 Nothing?  Come on, tell me.  What's goin' on?
LEIA	 I...I can't tell you.
HAN (loses his temper)	 Did you tell Luke? Is that who you could tell?
LEIA	 I...
HAN	 Ahhh...
HAN	 I'm sorry.
LEIA	 Hold me.
COMMANDER	 This is a Rebel that surrendered to us. Although he denies it, I believe there may be more of them, and I request permission to conduct a further search of the area.
COMMANDER	 He was armed only with this.
VADER	 Good work, Commander. Leave us. Conduct your search and bring his companions to me.
COMMANDER	 Yes, my Lord.
VADER	 The Emperor has been expecting you.
LUKE	 I know, father.
VADER	 So, you have accepted the truth.
LUKE	 I've accepted the truth that you were once Anakin Skywalker, my father.
VADER (turning to face him)	 That name no longer has any meaning for me.
LUKE	 It is the name of your true self. You've only forgotten. I know there is good in you. The Emperor hasn't driven it from you fully. That is why you couldn't destroy me. That's why you won't bring me to your Emperor now.
VADER (indicating lightsaber)	 I see you have constructed a new lightsaber.
VADER	 Your skills are complete. Indeed, you are powerful, as the Emperor has foreseen.
LUKE	 Come with me.
VADER	 Obi-Wan once thought as you do.
VADER	 You don't know the power of the dark side. I must obey my master.
LUKE	 I will not turn...and you'll be forced to kill me.
VADER	 If that is your destiny.
LUKE	 Search your feelings, father. You can't do this. I feel the conflict within you. Let go of your hate.
VADER	 It is too late for me, son. The Emperor will show you the true nature of the Force. He is your master now.
LUKE	 Then my father is truly dead.
LEIA	 The main entrance to the control bunker's on the far side of that landing platform. This isn't gonna be easy.
HAN	 Hey, don't worry. Chewie and me got into a lot of places more heavily guarded than this.
LEIA	 What's he saying?
THREEPIO	 He says there's a secret entrance on the other side of the ridge.
LANDO	 Admiral, we're in position. All fighters accounted for.
ACKBAR (VO)	 Proceed with the countdown. All groups assume attack coordinates.
LANDO	 Don't worry, my friends are down there. They'll have that shield down on time...(to himself) or this'll be the shortest offensive of all time.
ACKBAR (VO)	 All craft, prepare to jump to hyperspace on my mark.
LANDO	 All right. Stand by.
HAN	 Back door, huh? Good idea.
HAN (cont)	 It's only a few guards. This shouldn't be too much trouble.
LEIA	 Well, it only takes one to sound the alarm.
HAN (with self-confident grin)	 Then we'll do it real quiet-like.
THREEPIO	 Oh! Oh, my. Uh, Princess Leia!
LEIA	 Quiet.
THREEPIO	 I'm afraid our furry companion has gone and done something rather rash.
LEIA	 Oh, no.
HAN (sighs)	 There goes our surprise attack.
SCOUT	 Look! Over there! Stop him!
HAN	 Not bad for a little furball. There's only one left. You stay here. We'll take care of this.
THREEPIO	 I have decided that we shall stay here.
EMPEROR	 Welcome, young Skywalker. I have been expecting you.
EMPEROR	 You no longer need those.
EMPEROR	 Guards, leave us.
EMPEROR (to Luke)	 I'm looking forward to completing your training. In time you will call me Master.
LUKE	 You're gravely mistaken. You won't convert me as you did my father.
EMPEROR	 Oh, no, my young Jedi. You will find that it is you who are mistaken...about a great many things.
VADER	 His lightsaber.
EMPEROR	 Ah, yes, a Jedi's weapon. Much like your father's. By now you must know your father can never be turned from the dark side. So will it be with you.
LUKE	 You're wrong. Soon I'll be dead...and you with me.
EMPEROR	 Perhaps you refer to the imminent attack of your Rebel fleet.
EMPEROR	 Yes...I assure you we are quite safe from your friends here.
LUKE	 Your overconfidence is your weakness.
EMPEROR	 Your faith in your friends is yours.
VADER	 It is pointless to resist, my son.
EMPEROR (angry)	 Everything that has transpired has done so according to my design. (indicates Endor) Your friends up there on the Sanctuary Moon...
EMPEROR (cont)	 ...are walking into a trap. As is your Rebel fleet! It was I who allowed the Alliance to know the location of the shield generator. It is quite safe from your pitiful little band. An entire legion of my best troops awaits them.
EMPEROR	 Oh...I'm afraid the deflector shield will be quite operational when your friends arrive.
HAN	 All right! Up! Move! Come on! Quickly! Quickly, Chewie.
LEIA	 Han! Hurry! The fleet will be here any moment.
HAN	 Charges!  Come on, come on!
THREEPIO (to Wicket)	 Oh, my! They'll be captured!
THREEPIO	 Wa-wait! Wait, come back! Artoo, stay with me.
COMMANDER	 Freeze! You Rebel scum.
LANDO	 All wings report in.
WEDGE	 Red Leader standing by.
GRAY LEADER	 Gray Leader standing by.
GREEN LEADER	 Green Leader standing by.
WEDGE	 Lock S-foils in attack positions.
ACKBAR	 May the Force be with us.
LANDO	 We've got to be able to get some kind of a reading on that shield, up or down. Well, how could they be jamming us if they don't know if we're coming.
LANDO	 Break off the attack! The shield is still up.
RED LEADER (VO)	 I get no reading. Are you sure?
LANDO	 Pull up! All craft pull up!
ACKBAR	 Take evasive action! Green Group, stick close to holding sector MV-7.
CONTROLLER	 Admiral, we have enemy ships in sector 47.
ACKBAR	 It's a trap!
LANDO (over comlink)	 Fighters coming in.
REBEL PILOT	 There's too many of them!
LANDO	 Accelerate to attack speed! Draw their fire away from the cruisers.
WEDGE	 Copy, Gold Leader.
EMPEROR	 Come, boy. See for yourself.
EMPEROR	 From here you will witness the final destruction of the Alliance, and the end of your insignificant Rebellion.
EMPEROR	 You want this, don't you? The hate is swelling in you now. Take your Jedi weapon. Use it. I am unarmed. Strike me down with it. Give in to your anger. With each passing moment, you make yourself more my servant.
LUKE	 No!
EMPEROR	 It is unavoidable. It is your destiny. You, like your father, are now mine!
STORMTROOPER	 All right, move it! I said move it! Go on!
THREEPIO	 Hello! I say, over there! Were you looking for me?
BUNKER COMMANDER	 Bring those two down here!
STORMTROOPER	 Let's go!
THREEPIO	 Well, they're on their way. Artoo, are you sure this was a good idea?
STORMTROOPER	 Freeze! Don't move!
THREEPIO	 We surrender.
THREEPIO	 Ohhh! Stand back, Artoo.
LEIA	 The code's changed. We need Artoo!
HAN	 Here's the terminal.
LEIA (into comlink)	 Artoo, where are you? We need you at the bunker right away.
THREEPIO	 Going? What do you mean, you're going. But-- but going where, Artoo? No, what! Artoo! Oh, this is no time for heroics. Come back!
LANDO	 Watch yourself, Wedge! Three from above!
WEDGE	 Red Three, Red Two, pull in!
RED TWO	 Got it!
RED THREE	 Three of them coming in, twenty degrees!
WEDGE	 Cut to the left! I'll take the leader! They're heading for the medical frigate.
NAVIGATOR	 Pressure's steady.
LANDO	 Only the fighters are attacking.  I wonder what those Star Destroyers are waiting for.
COMMANDER	 We're in attack position now, sir.
PIETT	 Hold here.
COMMANDER	 We're not going to attack?
PIETT	 I have my orders from the Emperor himself. He has something special planned for them. We only need to keep them from escaping.
EMPEROR	 As you can see, my young apprentice, your friends have failed. Now witness the firepower of this fully armed and operational battle station. (into comlink) Fire at will, Commander.
JERJERROD	 Fire!
LANDO	 That blast came from the Death Star! That thing's operational! (into comlink) Home One, this is Gold Leader.
ACKBAR	 We saw it. All craft prepare to retreat.
LANDO	 You won't get another chance at this, Admiral.
ACKBAR	 We have no choice, General Calrissian. Our cruisers can't repel firepower of that magnitude.
LANDO	 Han will have that shield down. We've got to give him more time.
THREEPIO	 We're coming!
HAN	 Come on! Come on!
THREEPIO	 Oh, Artoo, hurry!
THREEPIO	 My goodness! Artoo, why did you have to be so brave?
HAN	 Well, I suppose I could hotwire this thing.
LEIA	 I'll cover you.
LANDO (desperately)	 Yes! I said closer! Move as close as you can and engage those Star Destroyers at point- blank range.
ACKBAR	 At that close range, we won't last long against those Star Destroyers.
LANDO	 We'll last longer then we will against that Death Star...and we might just take a few of them with us.
REBEL PILOT	 She's gonna blow!
Y-WING PILOT	 I'm hit!
EMPEROR	 Your fleet has lost. And your friends on the Endor moon will not survive. There is no escape, my young apprentice. The Alliance will die...as will your friends.
EMPEROR	 Good. I can feel your anger. I am defenseless.  Take your weapon! Strike me down with all your hatred, and your journey towards the dark side will be complete.
WALKER PILOT #1	 Look!
PILOT #2	 Get him off of there!
HAN	 I think I got it. I got it!
THREEPIO	 Oh, Princess Leia, are you all right?
HAN	 Let's see.
LEIA	 It's not bad.
STORMTROOPER (OS)	 Freeze!
THREEPIO	 Oh, dear.
STORMTROOPER	 Don't move!
HAN	 I love you.
LEIA	 I know.
STORMTROOPER	 Hands up! Stand up!
HAN (to Leia)	 Stay back.
HAN	 Chewie!  Get down here!  She's wounded!  No, wait....  I got an idea.
EMPEROR (laughing)	 Good.  Use your aggressive feelings, boy!  Let the hate flow through you.
VADER	 Obi-Wan has taught you well.
LUKE	 I will not fight you, father.
VADER	 You are unwise to lower your defenses.
LUKE	 Your thoughts betray you, father. I feel the good in you...the conflict.
VADER	 There is no conflict.
LUKE	 You couldn't bring yourself to kill me before, and I don't believe you'll destroy me now.
VADER	 You underestimate the power of the dark side. If you will not fight, then you will meet your destiny.
EMPEROR (laughs)	 Good.  Good.
LANDO	 Watch out. Squad at .06.
REBEL PILOT	 I'm on it, Gold Leader.
WEDGE	 Good shot, Red Two.
LANDO	 Now...come on, Han, old buddy. Don't let me down.
HAN/PILOT (VO)	 It's over, Commander. The Rebels have been routed. They're fleeing into the woods. We need reinforcements to continue the pursuit.
CONTROL ROOM COMMANDER	 Send three squads to help. Open the back door.
SECOND COMMANDER	 Yes, sir.
HAN	 Throw me another charge.
VADER	 You cannot hide forever, Luke.
LUKE	 I will not fight you.
VADER	 Give yourself to the dark side. It is the only way you can save your friends. Yes, your thoughts betray you. Your feelings for them are strong. Especially for...
VADER	 Sister! So...you have a twin sister. Your feelings have now betrayed her, too. Obi-Wan was wise to hide her from me. Now his failure is complete. If you will not turn to the dark side, then perhaps she will.
LUKE	 Never-r-r!
EMPEROR	 Good! Your hate has made you powerful. Now, fulfill your destiny and take your father's place at my side!
LUKE	 Never! I'll never turn to the dark side. You've failed, Your Highness. I am a Jedi, like my father before me.
EMPEROR	 So be it...Jedi.
HAN	 Move! Move!
ACKBAR	 The shield is down! Commence attack on the Death Star's main reactor.
LANDO	 We're on our way. Red Group, Gold Group, all fighters follow me. (laughs) Told you they'd do it!
EMPEROR	 If you will not be turned, you will be destroyed.
EMPEROR	 Young fool...only now, at the end, do you understand.
EMPEROR	 Your feeble skills are no match for the power of the dark side. You have paid the price for your lack of vision.
LUKE (groans)	 Father, please. Help me.
EMPEROR	 Now, young Skywalker...you will die.
WEDGE	 I'm going in.
LANDO	 Here goes nothing.
LANDO	 Now lock onto the strongest power source. It should be the power generator.
WEDGE	 Form up. And stay alert. We could run out of space real fast.
LANDO	 Split up and head back to the surface. See if you can get a few of those TIE fighters to follow you.
PILOT	 Copy, Gold Leader.
LANDO	 That was too close.
ACKBAR	 We've got to give those fighters more time. Concentrate all fire on that Super Star Destroyer.
CONTROLLER	 Sir, we've lost our bridge deflector shield.
PIETT	 Intensify the forward batteries. I don't want anything to get through.
PIETT	 Intensify forward firepower!
COMMANDER	 It's too late!
VADER (a whisper)	 Luke, help me take this mask off.
LURE	 But you'll die.
VADER	 Nothing can stop that now. Just for once... let me look on you with my own eyes.
ANAKIN (very weak)	 Now...go, my son. Leave me.
LUKE	 No. You're coming with me. I can't leave you here. I've got to save you.
ANAKIN	 You already have, Luke. You were right about me. Tell your sister...you were right.
LUKE	 Father... I won't leave you.
WEDGE	 There it is!
LANDO	 All right, Wedge. Go for the power regulator on the north tower.
WEDGE	 Copy, Gold Leader. I'm already on my way out.
ACKBAR	 Move the fleet away from the Death Star.
LANDO (into comlink)	 Wedge, I don't think we're going to make it.
WEDGE (VO)	 You'll make it. Just follow me Gold Leader.
LANDO (to himself)	 I promised to return his ship without a scratch...I sure hope that old pirate forgives me.
HAN (whispering to himself)	 Lando...
THREEPIO	 (misinterpreting Han's reference) They did it!
FADE OUT	STAR WARS - EPISODE 5: THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK

LUKE: (into comlink) Echo Three to Echo Seven. Han, old buddy, do you  read me?
HAN: (over comlink) Loud and clear, kid. What's up? 
LUKE: (into comlink) Well, I finished my circle. I don't pick up any  life readings.
HAN: (over comlink) There isn't enough life on this ice cube to fill a  space cruiser. The sensors are placed. I'm going back.
LUKE: (into comlink) Right. I'll see you shortly. There's a meteorite  that hit the ground near here. I want to check it out. It won't take long.
LUKE: Hey, steady girl. What's the matter? You smell something? 
LUKE: Aaargh! 
HAN: Chewie! 
HAN: All right, don't lose your temper. I'll come right back and give  you a hand.
RIEEKAN: Solo? 
HAN: No sign of life out there, General. The sensors are in place.  You'll know if anything comes around.
RIEEKAN: Commander Skywalker reported in yet? 
HAN: No. He's checking out a meteorite that hit near him. 
RIEEKAN: (indicates radar screen) With all the meteor activity in this  system, it's going to be difficult to spot approaching ships.
HAN: General, I've got to leave. I can't stay anymore. 
RIEEKAN: I'm sorry to hear that. 
HAN: Well, there's a price on my head. If I don't pay off Jabba the  Hut, I'm a dead man.
RIEEKAN: A death mark's not an easy thing to live with. You're a good  fighter, Solo. I hate to lose you.
HAN: Thank you, General. 
HAN: (with feeling) Well, Your Highness, I guess this is it. 
LEIA: That's right. 
HAN: (cooly) Well, don't get all mushy on me. So long, Princess. 
LEIA: Han! 
HAN: Yes, Your Highnessness? 
LEIA: I thought you decided to stay. 
HAN: Well, the bounty hunter we ran into on Ord Mantell changed my  mind. 
LEIA: Han, we need you! 
HAN: We? 
LEIA: Yes. 
HAN: Oh, what about you need? 
LEIA: (mystified) I need? I don't know what you're talking about. 
HAN: (shakes his head, fed up) You probably don't. 
LEIA: And what precisely am I supposed to know? 
HAN: Come on! You want me to stay because of the way you feel about  me.
LEIA: Yes. You're a great help to us. You're a natural leader... 
HAN: No! That's not it. Come on. Aahhh -- uh huh! Come on. 
LEIA: You're imagining things. 
HAN: Am I? Then why are you following me? Afraid I was going to leave  without giving you a goodbye kiss?
LEIA: I'd just as soon kiss a Wookiee. 
HAN: I can arrange that. You could use a good kiss! 
THREEPIO: Don't try to blame me. I didn't ask you to turn on the  thermal heater. I merely commented that it was freezing in the princess's chamber. But it's supposed to be freezing. How are we going to dry out all her clothes? I really don't know.
THREEPIO: Oh, switch off. 
HAN: (to Chewie) Why do you take this apart now? I'm trying to get us  out of here and you pull both of these.
THREEPIO: Excuse me, sir. 
HAN: (to Chewie) Put them back together right now. 
THREEPIO: Might I have a word with you, please? 
HAN: What do you want? 
THREEPIO: Well, it's Princess Leia, sir. She's been trying to get you  on the communicator.
HAN: I turned it off. I don't want to talk to her. 
THREEPIO: Oh. Well, Princess Leia is wondering about Master Luke. He  hasn't come back yet. She doesn't know where he is.
HAN: I don't know where he is. 
THREEPIO: Nobody knows where he is. 
HAN: What do you mean, "nobody knows"? 
THREEPIO: Well, uh, you see... 
HAN: Deck Officer. Deck Officer! 
THREEPIO: Excuse me, sir. Might I inqu-... 
DECK OFFICER: Yes, sir? 
HAN: Do you know where Commander Skywalker is? 
DECK OFFICER: I haven't seen him. It's possible he came in through the  south entrance.
HAN: It's possible? Why don't you go find out? It's getting dark out  there.
DECK OFFICER: Yes, sir. 
THREEPIO: Excuse me, sir. Might I inquire what's going on? 
HAN: Why not? 
THREEPIO: Impossible man. Come along, Artoo, lets find Princess Leia.  Between ourselves, I think Master Luke is in considerable danger.
DECK OFFICER: Sir, Commander Skywalker hasn't come in through the  south entrance. He might have forgotten to check in.
HAN: Not likely. Are the speeders ready? 
DECK OFFICER: Not yet. We're having some trouble adapting them to the  cold.
HAN: Then we'll have to go out on Tauntauns. 
DECK OFFICER: Sir, the temperature's dropping too rapidly. 
HAN: That's right. And my friends out in it. 
ASSISTANT OFFICER: I'll cover sector twelve. Have com-control set  screen alpha.
DECK OFFICER: Your Tauntaun'll freeze before you reach the first  marker.
HAN: Then I'll see you in hell! 
THREEPIO: You must come along now, Artoo. There's really nothing more  we can do. And my joints are freezing up.
THREEPIO: Don't say thing like that! Of course we'll see Master Luke  again. He'll be quite all right, you'll see. (to himself) Stupid little short-circuit. He'll be quite all right.
LIEUTENANT: Sir, all the patrols are in. There's still no contact from  Skywalker or Solo.
THREEPIO: Mistress Leia, Artoo says he's been quite unable to pick up  any signals, although he does admit that his own range is far too weak to abandon all hope.
DERLIN: Your Highness, there's nothing more we can do tonight. The  shield doors must be closed.
DERLIN: Close the doors. 
LIEUTENANT: Yes, sir. 
THREEPIO: Artoo says the chances of survival are seven hundred  seventy-five...to one.
THREEPIO: Actually, Artoo has been known to make mistakes...from time  to time. Oh, dear, oh, dear. Don't worry about Master Luke. I'm sure he'll be all right. He's quite clever, you know...for a human being.
BEN: Luke...Luke. 
LUKE: (weakly) Ben? 
BEN: You will go to the Dagobah system. 
LUKE: Dagobah system? 
BEN: There you will learn from Yoda, the Jedi Master who instructed  me.
LUKE: (groaning faintly) Ben...Ben. 
HAN: Luke! Luke! Don't do this, Luke. Come on, give me a sign here. 
HAN: Not much time. 
LUKE: (moaning) Ben...Ben... 
HAN: Hang on, kid. 
LUKE: Dagobah system... 
HAN: (reeling from the odor) Whew... 
LUKE: Dagobah... 
HAN: This may smell bad, kid... 
LUKE: (moaning) Yoda... 
HAN: ...but it will keep you warm...til I get the shelter built.  (struggling to get Luke in the carcass) Ooh...I thought they smelled bad on the outside!
ZEV: (into transmitter) Echo Base...I've got something! Not much, but  it could be a life form.
ZEV: (into transmitter) This is Rouge Two. this is Rouge Two. Captain  Solo, so you copy? Commander Skywalker, do you copy? This is Rouge Two.
HAN: (filtered over Zev's receiver) Good morning. Nice of you guys to  drop by.
ZEV: (switching transmitters) Echo Base...this is Rouge Two. I found  them. Repeat, I found them.
THREEPIO: Master Luke, sir, it's good to see you fully functional  again.
THREEPIO: Artoo expresses his relief, also. 
HAN: How are you feeling, kid? You don't look so bad to me. In fact,  you look strong enough to pull the ears off a Gundark.
LUKE: Thanks to you. 
HAN: That's two you owe me, junior. 
HAN: Well your Worship, looks like you managed to keep me around for a  little while longer.
LEIA: (haughtily) I had nothing to do with it. General Rieekan thinks  it's dangerous for any ships to leave the system until we've activated the energy shield.
HAN: That's a good story. I think you just can't bear to let a  gorgeous guy like me out of your sight.
LEIA: I don't know where you get you delusions, laser brain. 
HAN: Laugh it up, fuzz ball. But you didn't see us alone in the south  passage.
HAN: She expressed her true feelings for me. 
LEIA: My...! Why, you stuck up,...half-witted,...scruffy-looking...  nerf-herder!
HAN: Who's scruffy-looking? (to Luke) I must have hit her pretty close  to the mark to get her all riled up like that, huh, kid?
LEIA: Why, I guess you don't know everything about women yet? 
ANNOUNCER: (over loudspeaker) Headquarters personnel, report to command  center.
HAN: Take it easy. 
THREEPIO: Excuse us, please. 
RIEEKAN: Princess...we have a visitor. 
RIEEKAN: We've picked up something outside the base in zone twelve,  moving east.
SENIOR CONTROLLER: It's metal. 
LEIA: Then it couldn't be one of those creatures that attacked Luke. 
HAN: It could be a speeder, one of ours. 
SENIOR CONTROLLER: No. Wait -- there's something very weak coming  through.
THREEPIO: Sir, I am fluent in six million forms of communication. This  signal is not used by the Alliance. It could be an Imperial code.
HAN: It isn't friendly, whatever it is. Come on, Chewie, let's check  it out.
RIEEKAN: Send Rouges Ten and Eleven to station three-eight. 
HAN: (over comlink) Afraid there's not much left. 
LEIA: (into comlink) What was it? 
HAN: (over comlink) Droid of some kind. I didn't hit it that hard. It  must have had a self-destruct.
LEIA: (into comlink) An Imperial probe droid. 
HAN: (over comlink) It's a good bet the Empire knows we're here. 
RIEEKAN: We'd better start the evacuation. 
PIETT: Admiral. 
OZZEL: Yes, Captain 
PIETT: I think we've got something, sir. The report is only a fragment  had.
OZZEL: (irritated) We have thousands of probe droids searching the  galaxy. I want proof, not leads!
PIETT: The visuals indicate life readings. 
OZZEL: It could mean anything. If we followed every lead... 
PIETT: But, sir, the Hoth system is supposed to be devoid of human  forms.
VADER: You found something? 
PIETT: Yes, my lord. 
VADER: (studying the image on the console screen) That's it. The  Rebels are there.
OZZEL: My lord, there are so many uncharted settlements. It could be  smugglers, it could be...
VADER: That is the system. And I'm sure Skywalker is with them. Set  your course for the Hoth system. General Veers, prepare you men.
REBEL CAPTAIN: Groups seven and ten will stay behind to fly the  speeders. As soon as each transport is loaded, evacuation control will give clearance for immediate launch.
REBEL FIGHTER: Right, sir. 
HAN: (into comlink, to Chewie) Okay, that's it. Try it...Off! Turn it  off! Turn it off! Off!
MEDICAL DROID: Sir, it will take quite awhile to evacuate the T-forty-  sevens.
LUKE: Well, forget the heavy equipment. There's plenty of time to get  the smaller modules on the transports.
MEDICAL DROID: Take care, sir. 
LUKE: Thanks. 
LUKE: Chewie, take care of yourself, okay? 
HAN: Hi, kid. (to droid) There's got to be a reason for it. Check it  at the other end. Wait a second. (to Luke) You all right?
LUKE: Yeah. 
HAN: Be careful. 
LUKE: You, too. 
CONTROLLER: General, there's a fleet of Star Destroyers coming out of  hyperspace in sector four.
RIEEKAN: Reroute all power to the energy shield. We've got to hold  them till all transports are away. Prepare for ground assault.
VADER: What is it, General? 
VEERS: My lord, the fleet has moves out of light-speed. Com-Scan has  detected an energy field protecting an area around the sixth planet of the Hoth system. The field is strong enough to deflect any bombardment.
VADER: (angrily) The Rebels are alerted to our presence. Admiral Ozzel  came out of light-speed too close to the system.
VEERS: He felt surprise was wiser... 
VADER: He is as clumsy as he is stupid. General, prepare your troops  for a surface attack.
VEERS: Yes, my lord. 
OZZEL: Lord Vader, the fleet has moved out of light-speed, and we're  preparing to...Aaagh!
VADER: You have failed me for the last time, Admiral. Captain Piett. 
PIETT: Yes, my lord. 
VADER: Make ready to land out troops beyond the energy shield and  deploy the fleet so that nothing gets off that system. You are in command now, Admiral Piett.
PIETT: Thank you, Lord Vader. 
LEIA: All troop carriers will assemble at the north entrance. The  heavy transport ships will leave as soon as they're loaded. Only two fighter escorts per ship. The energy shield can only be opened for a short time, so you'll have to stay very close to your transports.
HOBBIE: Two fighters against a Star Destroyer? 
LEIA: The ion cannon will fire several shots to make sure that any  enemy ships will be out of your flight path. When you've gotten past the energy shield, proceed directly to the rendezvous point. Understood?
PILOTS: (in unison) Right. Okay. 
LEIA: Good luck. 
DERLIN: Okay. Everyone to your stations. Let's go! 
RIEEKAN: Their primary target will be the power generators. Prepare to  open the shield.
CONTROLLER: Sir, Rebel ships are coming into our sector. 
CAPTAIN: Good. Our first catch of the day. 
WOMAN CONTROLLER: Stand by, ion control....Fire! 
ANNOUNCER: (over loudspeaker) The first transport is away. 
DACK: Feeling all right, sir? 
LUKE: Just like new, Dack. How about you? 
DACK: Right now I feel I could take on the whole Empire myself. 
LUKE: (quietly, strapping in) I know what you mean. 
TRENCH OFFICER: Echo Station Three-T-Eight. 
TRENCH OFFICER: (over comlink) We have spotted Imperial walkers! 
CONTROLLER: Imperial walkers on the north ridge. 
LUKE: (into comlink) Echo station Five-Seven. We're on our way. 
LUKE: (into comlink) All right, boys, keep tight now. 
DACK: Luke, I have no approach vector. I'm not set. 
LUKE: Steady, Dack. Attack pattern delta. Go now! 
LUKE: All right, I'm coming in. 
LUKE: (into comlink) Hobbie, you still with me? 
LUKE: That armor's too strong for blasters. 
LUKE: (into comlink) Rouge Group, use your harpoons and tow cables. Go  for the legs. It might be our only chance of stopping them. (to Dack) All right, stand by, Dack.
DACK: Luke, we've got a malfunction in fire control. I'll have to cut  in the auxiliary.
LUKE: Just hang on. Hang on, Dack. Get ready to fire that tow cable. 
LUKE: Dack? Dack! 
VEERS: Yes, Lord Vader. I've reached the main power generator. The  shield will be down in moments. You may start your landing.
LUKE: (into comlink) Rouge Three. 
WEDGE: (into comlink) Copy, Rouge Leader 
LUKE: (over comlink) Wedge, I've lost my gunner. You'll have to make  this shot. I'll cover for you. Set your harpoon. Follow me on the next pass.
WEDGE: (into comlink) Coming around, Rouge Leader. 
LUKE: (into comlink) Steady, Rouge Two 
WEDGE: (to gunner) Activate harpoon. 
WEDGE: (to gunner) Good shot, Janson. 
WEDGE: One more pass. 
JANSON: Coming around. Once more. 
JANSON: One more. 
JANSON: Cable out! Let her go! 
WEDGE: Detach cable. 
JANSON: Cable detached. 
TRENCH OFFICER: Come on! 
WEDGE: (into comlink) Whooha!! That got him! 
LUKE: (into comlink) I see it, Wedge. Good work. 
RIEEKAN: I don't think we can protect two transports at a time. 
LEIA: It's risky, but we can't hold out much longer. We have no  choice.
RIEEKAN: (into comlink) Launch patrols. 
LEIA: (to an aide) Evacuate remaining ground staff. 
HAN: No, no! No! This one goes there, that one goes there. right? 
THREEPIO: Artoo, you take good care of Master Luke now, understand?  And...do take care of yourself. Oh, dear, oh, dear.
VEERS: All troops will debark for ground assault. Prepare to target  the main generator.
LUKE: (into comlink) Rouge Two, are you all right? 
ZEV: (into comlink) Yeah. I'm with you, Rouge Leader. 
LUKE: (into comlink) We'll set harpoon. I'll cover for you. 
ZEV: (into comlink) Coming around. 
LUKE: (into comlink) Watch that cross fire, boys. 
ZEV: (into comlink) Set for position three. (to gunner) Steady. 
LUKE: (over comlink) Stay tight and low. 
LUKE: (into comlink) Hobbie, I've been hit! 
HAN: You all right? 
LEIA: Why are you still here? 
HAN: I heard the command center had been hit. 
LEIA: You got your clearance to leave. 
HAN: Don't worry. I'll leave. First I'm going to get you to your ship. 
THREEPIO: Your Highness, we must take this last transport. It's our  only hope.
LEIA: (to controller) Send all troops in sector twelve to the south  slope to protect the fighters.
ANNOUNCER: (over loudspeaker) Imperial troops have entered the base. 
HAN: Come on...that's it. 
LEIA: (to head controller) Give the evacuation code signal. And get to  your transports!
HEAD CONTROLLER: K-one-zero...all troops disengage. 
THREEPIO: (to Han and Leia) Oh! Wait for me! 
OFFICER: Begin retreat! 
SECOND OFFICER: Fall back! 
VEERS: Distance to power generators? 
PILOT: One-seven, decimal two-eight. 
VEERS: Target. Maximum fire power. 
HAN: (into comlink) Transport, this is Solo. Better take off -- I  can't get to you. I'll get the princess out on the Falcon.
THREEPIO: But...but...but...where are you going? Uh...come back!! 
THREEPIO: Wait! Wait for me! Wait! Stop! 
THREEPIO: (exasperated) How typical. 
HAN: Come on. 
HAN: Hurry up, goldenrod, or you're going to be a permanent resident! 
THREEPIO: Wait! Wait! 
HAN: (to Chewie) How's this? 
LEIA: Would it helped if I got out and pushed? 
HAN: It might. 
THREEPIO: Captain Solo, Captain Solo...sir, might I suggest that  you...
THREEPIO: It can wait. 
LEIA: The bucket of bolts is never going to get us past that blockade. 
HAN: This baby's got a few surprises left in her, sweetheart. 
HAN: Come on! Come on! Switch over. Let's hope we don't have a  burnout.
HAN: See? 
LEIA: Someday you're going to be wrong, and I hope I'm there to see it. 
HAN: Punch it! 
LUKE: Artoo! Get her ready for takeoff. 
WEDGE: Good luck, Luke. See you at the rendezvous. 
LUKE: Don't worry, Artoo. We're going, we're going. 
LUKE: (into comlink) There's nothing wrong, Artoo. I'm just setting a  new course.
LUKE: (into comlink) We're not going to regroup with the others. 
LUKE: (into comlink) We're going to the Dagobah system. 
LUKE: (into comlink) Yes, Artoo? 
LUKE: (into comlink, chuckling) That's all right. I'd like to keep it  on manual control for a while.
HAN: (harried) I saw them! I saw them! 
LEIA: Saw what? 
HAN: Star Destroyers, two of them, coming right at us. 
THREEPIO: Sir, sir! Might I suggest... 
HAN: (to Leia) Shut him up or shut him down! (to Chewie) Check the  deflector shield!
HAN: Oh, great. Well, we can still outmaneuver them. 
IMPERIAL OFFICER: Take evasive action! 
HAN: Prepare to make the jump to light-speed. 
THREEPIO: But, sir! 
LEIA: They're getting closer! 
HAN: (with a gleam in his eye) Oh yeah? Watch this. 
LEIA: Watch what? 
HAN: I think we're in trouble. 
THREEPIO: If I may say so, sir, I noticed earlier the hyperdrive  motivator has been damaged. It's impossible to go to light-speed!
HAN: We're in trouble! 
HAN: Horizontal boosters...! 
HAN: Alluvial dampers...! Well that's not it. 
HAN: Bring me the hydrospanners! 
HAN: I don't know how we're going to get out of this one. 
HAN: Oww! Chewie! 
HAN: That was no laser blast! Something hit us. 
LEIA: (over comlink) Han, get up here! 
HAN: Come on, Chewie! 
LEIA: Asteroids! 
HAN: Oh, no! Chewie, set two-seven-one. 
LEIA: What are you doing? You're not actually going into an asteroid  field?
HAN: They'd be crazy to follow us, wouldn't they? 
LEIA: You don't have to do this to impress me. 
THREEPIO: Sir, the possibility of successfully navigating an asteroid  field is approximately three thousand, seven hundred and twenty to one.
HAN: Never tell me the odds! 
HAN: You said you wanted to be around when I made a mistake; well,  this could be it, sweetheart.
LEIA: I take it back. We're going to get pulverized if we stay out  here much longer.
HAN: I'm not going to argue with that. 
THREEPIO: Pulverized? 
HAN: I'm going in closer to one of the big ones. 
LEIA: Closer? 
THREEPIO: Closer?! 
THREEPIO: Oh, this is suicide! 
HAN: There. That looks pretty good. 
LEIA: What looks pretty good? 
HAN: Yeah. That'll do nicely. 
THREEPIO: (to Leia) Excuse me, ma'am, but where are we going? 
LEIA: I hope you know what you're doing. 
HAN: Yeah, me too. 
LUKE: (into comlink) Yes, that's it. Dagobah. 
LUKE: (into comlink) No, I'm not going to change my mind about this.  (getting a little nervous) I'm not picking up any cities or technology. Massive life-form readings, though. There's something alive down there...
LUKE: (into comlink) Yes, I'm sure it's perfectly safe for droids. 
LUKE: (into comlink) I know, I know! All the scopes are dead. I can't  see a thing! Just hang on, I'm going to start the landing cycle...
LUKE: No, Artoo, you stay put. I'll have a look around. 
LUKE: Artoo? 
LUKE: Artoo! Where are you? 
LUKE: Artoo! You be more careful. 
LUKE: Artoo -- that way! 
LUKE: Artoo! 
LUKE: Oh, no! Are you all right? Come on. You're lucky you don't taste  very good. Anything broken?
LUKE: If you're saying coming here was a bad idea, I'm beginning to  agree with you. Oh, Artoo, what are we doing here? It's like... something out of a dream, or, I don't know. Maybe I'm just going crazy.
VADER: Yes, Admiral? 
PIETT: Our ships have sighted the Millennium Falcon, lord. But...it  has entered an asteroid field and we cannot risk...
VADER: (interrupting) Asteroids do not concern me, Admiral. I want  that ship and not excuses.
PIETT: Yes, lord. 
HAN: I'm going to shut down everything but the emergency power  systems. 
THREEPIO: Sir, I'm almost afraid to ask, but...does that include  shutting me down, too?
HAN: No, I need you to talk to the Falcon, find out what's wrong with  the hyperdrive.
THREEPIO: Sir, it's quite possible this asteroid is not entirely  stable.
HAN: Not entirely stable? I'm glad you're here to tell us these  things.  Chewie, take the professor in the back and plug him into the hyperdrive.
THREEPIO: Oh! Sometimes I just don't understand human behavior. After  all, I'm only trying to do my job in the most...
LEIA: Let go. 
HAN: Sshh! 
LEIA: Let go, please. 
HAN: Don't get excited. 
LEIA: Captain, being held by you isn't quite enough to get me excited. 
HAN: Sorry, sweetheart. We haven't got time for anything else. 
LUKE: Ready for some power? Okay. Let's see now. Put that in there.  There you go.
LUKE: (sighs) Now all I have to do is find this Yoda...if he even  exists.
LUKE: Still...there's something familiar about this place. I feel  like...I don't know...
STRANGE VOICE: Feel like what? 
LUKE: (looking at the creature) Like we're being watched! 
CREATURE: Away with your weapon! I mean you no harm. 
CREATURE: I am wondering, why are you here? 
LUKE: I'm looking for someone. 
CREATURE: Looking? Found someone, you have, I would say, hmmm? 
LUKE: (Trying to keep from smiling) Right. 
CREATURE: Help you I can. Yes, mmmm. 
LUKE: I don't think so. I'm looking for a great warrior. 
CREATURE: Ahhh! A great warrior. (laughs and shakes his head) Wars not  make one great.
LUKE: Put that down. Hey! That's my dinner. 
CREATURE: How you get so big, eating food of this kind? 
LUKE: Listen, friend, we didn't mean to land in that puddle, and if we  could get our ship out, we would, but we can't, so why don't you just...
CREATURE: (teasing) Aww, cannot get your ship out? 
LUKE: Hey, you could have broken this. Don't do that. Ohhh...you're  making a mess. Hey, give me that!
CREATURE: (retreating with the lamp) Mine! Or I will help you not. 
LUKE: I don't want your help. I want my lamp back. I'll need it to get  out of this slimy mudhole.
CREATURE: Mudhole? Slimy? My home this is. 
CREATURE: Ah, ah, ah! 
LUKE: Oh, Artoo, let him have it. 
CREATURE: Mine! Mine! 
LUKE: Artoo! 
CREATURE: Mine! 
CREATURE: Mine! 
LUKE: (fed up) Now will you move along, little fella? We're got a lot  of work to do.
CREATURE: No! No, no! Stay and help you, I will. (laughs) Find your  friend, hmm?
LUKE: I'm not looking for a friend, I'm looking for a Jedi Master. 
CREATURE: Oohhh. Jedi Master. Yoda. You seek Yoda. 
LUKE: You know him? 
CREATURE: Mmm. Take you to him, I will. (laughs) Yes, yes. But now, we  must eat. Come. Good food. Come.
CREATURE: (in the distance) Come, come. 
LUKE: Stay here and watch after the camp, Artoo. 
THREEPIO: Oh, where is Artoo when I need him? 
THREEPIO: Sir, I don't know where your ship learned to communicate,  but it has the most peculiar dialect. I believe, sir, it says that the power coupling on the negative axis has been polarized. I'm afraid you'll have to replace it.
HAN: Well, of course I'll have to replace it. 
HAN: Here! And Chewie... 
HAN: (continued)...I think we'd better replace the negative power  coupling.
HAN: Hey, Your Worship, I'm only trying to help. 
LEIA: (still struggling) Would you please stop calling me that? 
HAN: Sure, Leia. 
LEIA: Oh, you make it so difficult sometimes. 
HAN: I do, I really do. You could be a little nicer, though. (he  watches her reaction) Come on, admit it. Sometimes you think I'm all right.
LEIA: Occasionally (a little smile, haltingly) maybe...when you aren't  acting like a scoundrel.
HAN: (laughs) Scoundrel? Scoundrel? I like the sound of that. 
LEIA: Stop that. 
HAN: Stop what? 
LEIA: Stop that! My hands are dirty. 
HAN: My hands are dirty, too. What are you afraid of? 
LEIA: (looking right into his eyes) Afraid? 
HAN: You're trembling. 
LEIA: I'm not trembling. 
HAN: You like me because I'm a scoundrel. There aren't enough  scoundrels in your life.
LEIA: I happen to like nice men. 
HAN: I'm a nice man. 
LEIA: No, you're not. You're... 
THREEPIO: Sir, sir! I've isolated the reverse power flux coupling. 
HAN: Thank you. Thank you very much. 
THREEPIO: Oh, you're perfectly welcome, sir. 
NEEDA: (in hologram)...and that, Lord Vader, was the last time they  appeared in any of our scopes. Considering the amount of damage we've sustained, they must have been destroyed.
VADER: No, Captain, they're alive. I want every ship available to  sweep the asteroid field until they are found.
PIETT: Lord Vader. 
VADER: Yes, Admiral, what is it? 
PIETT: The Emperor commands you make contact with him. 
VADER: Move the ship out of the asteroid field so that we can send a  clear transmission.
PIETT: Yes, my lord. 
VADER: What is thy bidding, my master? 
EMPEROR: There is a great disturbance in the Force. 
VADER: I have felt it. 
EMPEROR: We have a new enemy -- Luke Skywalker. 
VADER: Yes, my master. 
EMPEROR: He could destroy us. 
VADER: He's just a boy. Obi-Wan can no longer help him. 
EMPEROR: The Force is strong with him. The son of Skywalker must not  become a Jedi.
VADER: If he could be turned, he would become a powerful ally. 
EMPEROR: Yes. Yes. He would be a great asset. Can it be done? 
VADER: He will join us or die, my master. 
LUKE: Look, I'm sure it's delicious. I just don't understand why we  can't see Yoda now.
CREATURE: Patience! For the Jedi it is time to eat as well. Eat, eat.  Hot. Good food, hm? Good, hmm?
LUKE: How far away is Yoda? Will it take us long to get there? 
CREATURE: Not far. Yoda not far. Patience. Soon you will be with him.  (tasting food from the pot) Rootleaf, I cook. Why wish you become Jedi? Hm?
LUKE: Mostly because of my father, I guess. 
CREATURE: Ah, your father. Powerful Jedi was he, powerful Jedi, mmm. 
LUKE: (a little angry) Oh, come on. How could you know my father? You  don't even know who I am. (fed up) Oh, I don't even know what I'm doing here. We're wasting our time.
CREATURE: (irritated) I cannot teach him. The boy has no patience. 
BEN'S VOICE: He will learn patience. 
YODA: Hmmm. Much anger in him, like his father. 
BEN'S VOICE: Was I any different when you taught me? 
YODA: Hah. He is not ready. 
LUKE: Yoda! I am ready. I...Ben! I can be a Jedi. Ben, tell him I'm  ready.
YODA: Ready, are you? What know you of ready? For eight hundred years  have I trained Jedi. My own counsel will I keep on who is to be trained! A Jedi must have the deepest commitment, the most serious mind. (to the invisible Ben, indicating Luke) This one a long time have I watched. Never his mind on where he was. Hmm? What he was doing. Hmph. Adventure. Heh! Excitement. Heh! A Jedi craves not these things. (turning to Luke) You are reckless!
BEN'S VOICE: So was I, if you'll remember. 
YODA: He is too old. Yes, too old to begin the training. 
LUKE: But I've learned so much. 
YODA: (sighs) Will he finished what he begins? 
LUKE: I won't fail you -- I'm not afraid. 
YODA: (turns slowly toward him) Oh, you will be. You will be. 
THREEPIO: Sir, if I may venture an opinion... 
HAN: I'm not really interested in your opinion, Threepio. 
LEIA: (out of breath) There's something out there. 
HAN: Where? 
LEIA: Outside, in the cave. 
THREEPIO: There it is. Listen! Listen! 
HAN: I'm going out there. 
LEIA: Are you crazy?! 
HAN: I just got this bucket back together. I'm not going to let  something tear it apart.
LEIA: Then I'm going with you. 
THREEPIO: I think it might be better if I stay here and guard the  ship. (hears another mysterious noise) Oh, no.
LEIA: This ground sure feels strange. It doesn't feel like rock at  all.
HAN: There's an awful lot of moisture in here. 
LEIA: I don't know. I have a bad feeling about this. 
HAN: Yeah. 
HAN: (to Leia) Watch out! 
HAN: Yeah, that's what I thought. Mynock. Chewie, check the rest of  the ship, make sure there aren't any more attached. They're chewing on the power cables.
LEIA: Mynocks? 
HAN: Go on inside. We'll clean them off if there are any more. 
THREEPIO: Ohhh! Go away! Go away! Beastly thing. Shoo! Shoo! 
HAN: Wait a minute... 
HAN: All right, Chewie, let's get out of here! 
LEIA: The Empire is still out there. I don't think it's wise to... 
HAN: (interrupting) No time to discuss this as a committee. 
LEIA: (angry) I am not a committee! 
LEIA: You can't make the jump to light-speed in this asteroid field... 
HAN: Sit down, sweetheart. We're taking off! 
THREEPIO: Look! 
HAN: I see it, I see it. 
THREEPIO: We're doomed! 
LEIA: The cave is collapsing. 
HAN: This is no cave. 
LEIA: What? 
YODA: Run! Yes. A Jedi's strength flows from the Force. But beware of  the dark side. Anger...fear...aggression. The dark side of the Force are they. Easily they flow, quick to join you in a fight. If once you start down the dark path, forever will it dominate your destiny, consume you it will, as it did Obi-Wan's apprentice.
LUKE: Vader. Is the dark side stronger? 
YODA: No...no...no. Quicker, easier, more seductive. 
LUKE: But how am I to know the good side from the bad? 
YODA: You will know. When you are calm, at peace. Passive. A Jedi uses  the Force for knowledge and defense, never for attack.
LUKE: But tell me why I can't... 
YODA: (interrupting) No, no, there is no why. Nothing more will I  teach you today. Clear your mind of questions. Mmm. Mmmmmm.
LUKE: There's something not right here. 
LUKE: I feel cold, death. 
YODA: That place...is strong with the dark side of the Force. A domain  of evil it is. In you must go.
LUKE: What's in there? 
YODA: Only what you take with you. 
YODA: Your weapons...you will not need them. 
PIETT: Bounty hunters. We don't need that scum. 
FIRST CONTROLLER: Yes, sir. 
PIETT: Those Rebels won't escape us. 
SECOND CONTROLLER: Sir, we have a priority signal from the Star  Destroyer Avenger.
PIETT: Right. 
VADER: ...there will be a substantial reward for the one who finds  the Millennium Falcon. You are free to use any methods necessary, but I want them alive. No disintegrations.
BOBA FETT: As you wish. 
PIETT: Lord Vader! My lord, we have them. 
THREEPIO: Oh, thank goodness we're coming out of the asteroid field. 
HAN: Let's get out of here. Ready for light-speed? One...two...three! 
HAN: (frantic) It's not fair! 
HAN: The transfer circuits are working. It's not my fault! 
LEIA: (almost expecting it) No light-speed? 
HAN: It's not my fault. 
THREEPIO: Sir, we just lost the main rear deflector shield. One more  direct hit on the back quarter and we're done for.
HAN: Turn her around. 
HAN: I said turn her around! I'm going to put all power in the front  shield.
LEIA: You're going to attack them?! 
THREEPIO: Sir, the odds of surviving a direct assault on an Imperial  Star Destroyer...
LEIA: Shut up! 
NEEDA: They're moving to attack position. Shields up! 
NEEDA: Track them,. They may come around for another pass. 
TRACKING OFFICER: Captain Needa, the ship no longer appears on our  scopes.
NEEDA: They can't have disappeared. No ship that small has a cloaking  device.
TRACKING OFFICER: Well, there's no trace of them, sir. 
COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER: Captain, Lord Vader demands an update on the  pursuit.
NEEDA: (drawing a breath) Get a shuttle ready. I shall assume full  responsibility for losing them, and apologize to Lord Vader. Meanwhile, continue to scan the area.
COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER: Yes, Captain Needa. 
YODA: Use the Force. Yes... 
YODA: Now...the stone. Feel it. 
YODA: Concentrate! 
LUKE: Oh, no. We'll never get it out now. 
YODA: So certain are you. Always with you it cannot be done. Hear you  nothing that I say?
LUKE: Master, moving stones around is one thing. This is totally  different.
YODA: No! No different! Only different in your mind. You must unlearn  what you have learned.
LUKE: (focusing, quietly) All right, I'll give it a try. 
YODA: No! Try not. Do. Or do not. There is no try. 
LUKE: (panting heavily) I can't. It's too big. 
YODA: Size matters not. Look at me. Judge me by my size, do you? Hm?  Mmmm.
YODA: And well you should not. For my ally in the Force. And a  powerful ally it is. Life creates it, makes it grow. It's energy surrounds us and binds us. Luminous beings are we...(Yoda pinches Luke's shoulder)...not this crude matter. (a sweeping gesture) You must feel the Force around you. (gesturing) Here, between you...me...the tree...the rock...everywhere! Yes, even between this land and that ship!
LUKE: (discouraged) You want the impossible. 
LUKE: I don't...I don't believe it. 
YODA: That is why you fail. 
VADER: Apology accepted, Captain Needa. 
PIETT: Lord Vader, our ships have completed their scan of the area and  found nothing. If the Millennium Falcon went into light-speed, it'll be on the other side of the galaxy by now.
VADER: Alert all commands. Calculate every possible destination along  their last know trajectory.
PIETT: Yes, my lord. We'll find them. 
VADER: Don't fail me again, Admiral. 
PIETT: Alert all commands. Deploy the fleet. 
THREEPIO: Captain Solo, this time you have gone too far. (Chewie  growls) No, I will not be quiet, Chewbacca. Why doesn't anyone listen to me?
HAN: (to Chewie) The fleet is beginning to break up. Go back and stand  by the manual release for the landing claw.
THREEPIO: I really don't see how thats going to help. Surrender is a  perfectly acceptable alternative in extreme circumstances. The Empire may be gracious enough...
HAN: Thank you. 
LEIA: What did you have in mind for your next move? 
HAN: Well, if they follow standard Imperial procedure, they'll dump  their garbage before they go to light-speed, then we just float away.
LEIA: With the rest of the garbage. Then what? 
HAN: Then we've got to find a safe port somewhere around here. Got any  ideas?
LEIA: No. Where are we? 
HAN: The Anoat system. 
LEIA: Anoat system. There's not much there. 
HAN: No. Well, wait. This is interesting. Lando. 
LEIA: Lando system? 
HAN: Lando's not a system, he's a man. Lando Calrissian. He's a card  player, gambler, scoundrel. You'd like him.
LEIA: Thanks. 
HAN: Bespin. It's pretty far, but I think we can make it. 
LEIA: (reading from the computer) A mining colony? 
HAN: Yeah, a Tibanna gas mine. Lando conned somebody out of it. We go  back a long way, Lando and me.
LEIA: Can you trust him? 
HAN: No. But he has no love for the Empire, I can tell you that. 
HAN: (into intercom) Here we go, Chewie. Stand by. Detach! 
LEIA: You do have your moments. Not many, but you have them. 
YODA: Concentrate...feel the Force flow. Yes. Good. Calm, yes. Through  the Force, things you will see. Other places. The future...the past. Old friends long gone.
LUKE: Han! Leia! 
YODA: (shaking his head) Hmm. Control, control. You must learn control. 
LUKE: I saw...I saw a city in the clouds. 
YODA: Mmm. Friends you have there. 
LUKE: They were in pain. 
YODA: It is the future you see. 
LUKE: Future? Will they die? 
YODA: Difficult to see. Always in motion is the future. 
LUKE: I've got to go to them. 
YODA: Decide you must how to serve them best. If you leave now, help  them you could. But you would destroy all for which they have fought and suffered.
HAN: (into transmitter) No, I don't have a landing permit. I'm trying  to reach Lando Calrissian.
HAN: (into transmitter) Whoa! Wait a minute! Let me explain. 
INTERCOM VOICE: You will not deviate from your present course. 
THREEPIO: Rather touchy, aren't they? 
LEIA: I thought you knew this person. 
HAN: (to Chewie) Well, that was a long time ago. I'm sure he's  forgotten about that.
INTERCOM VOICE: Permission granted to land on Platform  Three-two-seven.
HAN: (into transmitter) Thank you. 
HAN: There's nothing to worry about. We go way back, Lando and me. 
LEIA: Who's worried? 
THREEPIO: Oh. No one to meet us. 
LEIA: I don't like this. 
HAN: Well, what would you like? 
THREEPIO: Well, they did let us land. 
HAN: Look, don't worry. Everything's going to be fine. Trust me. 
HAN: See? My friend. (to Chewie) Keep your eyes open, okay? 
LANDO: Why, you slimy, double-crossing, no-good swindler! You've got a  lot of guts coming here, after what you pulled.
LANDO: (laughs) How you doing, you old pirate? So good to see you! I  never thought I'd catch up with you again. Where you been?
THREEPIO: Well, he seems very friendly. 
LEIA: (wary) Yes...very friendly. 
LANDO: What are you doing here? 
HAN: (gestures toward the Falcon) Ahh...repairs. I thought you could  help me out.
LANDO: (in mock panic) What have you done to my ship? 
HAN: Your ship? Hey, remember, you lost her to me fair and square. 
LANDO: Hello. What have we here? Welcome. I'm Lando Calrissian. I'm  the administrator of this facility. and who might you be?
LEIA: Leia. 
LANDO: Welcome, Leia. 
HAN: All right, all right, you old smoothie. 
THREEPIO: Hello, sir. I am See-Threepio, human-cyborg relations. My  facilities are at your...
THREEPIO: Well, really! 
LANDO: What's wrong with the Falcon? 
HAN: Hyperdrive. 
LANDO: I'll get my people to work on it. 
HAN: Good. 
LANDO: You know, that ship saved my life quite a few times. She's the  fastest hunk of junk in the galaxy.
HAN: How's the gas mine? Is it paying off for you? 
LANDO: Oh, not as well as I'd like. We're a small outpost and not very  self-sufficient. And I've had supply problems of every kind. I've had labor difficulties...(catches Han grinning at him) What's so funny?
HAN: You. Listen to you -- you sound like a businessman, a responsible  leader. Who'd have thought that, huh?
LANDO: You know, seeing you sure brings back a few things. 
HAN: Yeah. 
LANDO: (shakes his head) Yeah, I'm responsible these days. It's the  price you pay for being successful.
THREEPIO: Oh! Nice to see a familiar face. 
SECOND THREEPIO: (mumbles) E chu ta! 
THREEPIO: How rude! 
THREEPIO: That sounds like an R2 unit in there. I wonder if... 
THREEPIO: Hello? How interesting. Oh, my. 
MAN'S VOICE: (from within) Who are you? 
THREEPIO: Oh, I'm terribly sorry. I...I didn't mean to intrude. No,  no, please don't get up. No!
YODA: Luke! You must complete the training. 
LUKE: I can't keep the vision out of my head. They're my friends. I've  got to help them.
YODA: You must not go! 
LUKE: But Han and Leia will die if I don't. 
BEN'S VOICE: You don't know that. 
BEN: Even Yoda cannot see their fate. 
LUKE: But I can help them! I feel the Force! 
BEN: But you cannot control it. This is a dangerous time for you, when  you will be tempted by the dark side of the Force.
YODA: Yes, yes. To Obi-Wan you listen. The cave. Remember your failure  at the cave!
LUKE: But I've learned so much since then. Master Yoda, I promise to  return and finish what I've begun. You have my word.
BEN: It is you and your abilities the Emperor wants. that is why your  friends are made to suffer.
LUKE: And that is why I have to go. 
BEN: Luke, I don't want to lose you to the Emperor the way I lost  Vader.
LUKE: You won't. 
YODA: Stopped they must be. On this depends. Only a fully trained Jedi  Knight with the Force as his ally will conquer Vader and his Emperor. If you end your training now, if you choose the quick and easy path, as Vader did, you will become an agent of evil.
BEN: Patience. 
LUKE: And sacrifice Han and Leia? 
YODA: If you honor what they fight for...yes! 
BEN: If you choose to face Vader, you will do it alone. I cannot  interfere.
LUKE: I understand. (he moves to his X-wing) Artoo, fire up the  converters.
BEN: Luke, don't give in to hate -- that leads to the dark side. 
YODA: Strong is Vader. Mind what you have learned. Save you it can. 
LUKE: I will. And I'll return. I promise. 
YODA: (sighs) Told you, I did. Reckless is he. Now matters are worse. 
BEN: That boy is our last hope. 
YODA: (looks up) No. There is another. 
HAN: The ship is almost finished. Two or Three more things and we're  in great shape.
LEIA: The sooner the better. Something's wrong here. No one has seen  or knows anything about Threepio. He's been gone too long to have gotten lost.
HAN: Relax. I'll talk to Lando and see what I can find out. 
LEIA: I don't trust Lando. 
HAN: Well, I don't trust him, either. But he is my friend. Besides,  we'll soon be gone.
LEIA: And then you're as good as gone, aren't you? 
LEIA: What happened? 
HAN: Where? Found him in a junk pile? 
LEIA: Oh, what a mess. Chewie, do you think you can repair him? 
HAN: Lando's got people who can fix him. 
LEIA: No, thanks. 
LANDO: I'm sorry. Am I interrupting anything? 
LEIA: Not really. 
LANDO: You look absolutely beautiful. You truly belong here with us  among the clouds.
LEIA: (coolly) Thank you. 
LANDO: Will you join me for a little refreshment? 
LANDO: Everyone's invited, of course. 
LANDO: Having trouble with you droid? 
HAN: No. No problem. Why? 
LANDO: So you see, since we're a small operation, we don't fall into  the...uh...jurisdiction of the Empire.
LEIA: So you're part of the mining guild then? 
LANDO: No, not actually. Our operation is small enough not to be  noticed...which is advantageous for everybody since our customers are anxious to avoid attracting attention to themselves.
HAN: Aren't you afraid the Empire's going to find out about this  little operation and shut you down?
LANDO: That's always been a danger looming like a shadow over  everything we've built here. But things have developed that will insure security. I've just made a deal that will keep the Empire out of here forever.
VADER: We would be honored if you would join us. 
LANDO: I had no choice. They arrived right before you did. I'm sorry. 
HAN: I'm sorry, too. 
LUKE: (into comlink) No, Threepio's with them. 
LUKE: (into comlink) Just hang on. We're almost there. 
THREEPIO: Mmmm. Oh, my. Uh, I, uh -- Take this off! I, uh, don't mean  to intrude here. I, don't, no, no, no...Please don't get up. No!
THREEPIO: Stormtroopers? Here? We're in danger. I must tell the  others. Oh, no! I've been shot!
LANDO: Lord Vader. 
VADER: (to Fett) You may take Captain Solo to Jabba the Hut after I  have Skywalker.
BOBA FETT: He's no good to me dead. 
VADER: He will not be permanently damaged. 
LANDO: Lord Vader, what about Leia and the Wookiee? 
VADER: They must never again leave this city. 
LANDO: That was never a condition of our agreement, nor was giving Han  to this bounty hunter!
VADER: Perhaps you think you're being treated unfairly. 
LANDO: No. 
VADER: Good. It would be unfortunate if I had to leave a garrison  here.
LANDO: This deal's getting worse all the time. 
THREEPIO: Oh, yes, that's very good. I like that. Oh! Something's not  right because now I can't see. Wait. Wait! Oh, my! what have you done? I'm backwards, you stupid furball. Only an overgrown mophead like you would be stupid enough...
HAN: I feel terrible. 
LEIA: Why are they doing this? 
HAN: They never even asked me any questions. 
LEIA: Lando. 
HAN: Get out of here, Lando! 
LANDO: Shut up and listen! Vader has agreed to turn Leia and Chewie  over to me.
HAN: Over to you? 
LANDO: They'll have to stay here, but at least they'll be safe. 
LEIA: What about Han? 
LANDO: Vader's giving him to the bounty hunter. 
LEIA: Vader wants us all dead. 
LANDO: He doesn't want you at all. He's after somebody called  Skywalker.
HAN: Luke? 
LANDO: Lord Vader has set a trap for him. 
LEIA: And we're the bait. 
LANDO: Well, he's on his way. 
HAN: Perfect. You fixed us all pretty good, didn't you? (spits it out)  My friend!
LANDO: Stop! I've done all I can do. I'm sorry I couldn't do better,  but I have my own problems.
HAN: Yeah, you're a real hero. 
LEIA: (dabs at his wound) You certainly have a way with people. 
VADER: This facility is crude, but it should be adequate to freeze  Skywalker for his journey to the Emperor.
IMPERIAL SOLDIER: Lord Vader, ship approaching. X-wing class. 
VADER: Good. Monitor Skywalker and allow him to land. 
LANDO: Lord Vader, we only use this facility for carbon freezing. If  you put him in there, it might kill him.
VADER: I do not want the Emperor's prize damaged. We will test it...on  Captain Solo.
THREEPIO: If only you had attached my legs, I wouldn't be in this  ridiculous position. Now, remember, Chewbacca, you have a responsibility to me, so don't do anything foolish.
HAN: (to Lando) What's going on...buddy? 
LANDO: You're being put into carbon freeze. 
BOBA FETT: What if he doesn't survive? He's worth a lot to me. 
VADER: The Empire will compensate you if he dies. Put him in! 
THREEPIO: Oh, no! No, no, no! Stop, Chewbacca, stop...! 
HAN: Stop, Chewie, stop! Do you hear me? Stop! 
THREEPIO: Yes, stop, please! I'm not ready to die. 
HAN: Chewie! Chewie, this won't help me. Hey! 
HAN: Save your strength. There'll be another time. The princess -- you  have to take care of her. You hear me?
LEIA: I love you! 
HAN: I know. 
THREEPIO: What...what's going on? Turn around, Chewbacca, I can't see.  Oh...they've encased him in carbonite. He should be quite well-protected -- if he survives the freezing process, that is.
VADER: Well, Calrissian, did he survive? 
LANDO: Yes, he's alive. And in perfect hibernation. 
VADER: He's all yours bounty hunter. Reset the chamber for Skywalker. 
IMPERIAL OFFICER: Skywalker has just landed, my lord. 
VADER: Good. See to it that he finds his way here. Calrissian, take  the princess and the Wookiee to my ship.
LANDO: You said they'd be left in the city under my supervision. 
VADER: I am altering the deal. Pray I don't alter it any further. 
LEIA: Luke! Luke, don't -- it's a trap! It's a trap! 
VADER: The Force is with you, young Skywalker. But you are not a Jedi  yet.
LANDO: Well done. Hold them in the security tower -- and keep it  quiet. Move.
LEIA: What do you think you're doing? 
LANDO: We're getting out of here. 
THREEPIO: I knew all along it had to be a mistake. 
LEIA: Do you think that after what you did to Han we're going to trust  you?
LANDO: (choking) I had no choice... 
THREEPIO: (to Chewie) What are you doing? Trust him, trust him! 
LEIA: Oh, so we understand, don't we, Chewie? He had no choice. 
LANDO: I'm just trying to help... 
LEIA: We don't need any of your help. 
LANDO: (choking) H-a-a-a... 
LEIA: What? 
THREEPIO: It sounds like Han. 
LANDO: There's still a chance to save Han...I mean, at the East  Platform...
LEIA: Chewie. 
THREEPIO: (to Lando) I'm terribly sorry about all this. After all,  he's only a Wookiee.
BOBA FETT: Put Captain Solo in the cargo hold. 
THREEPIO: Artoo! Artoo! Where have you been? 
THREEPIO: Turn around, you wooly...! (to Artoo) Hurry, hurry! We're  trying to save Han from the bounty hunter!
THREEPIO: Well, at least your still in one piece! Look what happened  to me!
THREEPIO: Oh, no! Chewie, they're behind you! 
VADER: You have learned much, young one. 
LUKE: You'll find I'm full of surprises. 
VADER: Your destiny lies with me, Skywalker. Obi-Wan knew this to be  true.
LUKE: No! 
VADER: All to easy. Perhaps you are not as strong as the Emperor  thought.
VADER: Impressive...most impressive. 
VADER: Obi-Wan has taught you well. You have controlled your fear...  now release your anger.
VADER: Only your hatred can destroy me. 
LANDO: The security codes has been changed! 
THREEPIO: Artoo, you can tell the computer to override the security  system.
LANDO: Attention! This is Lando Calrissian. The Empire has takes  control of the city. I advise everyone to leave before more Imperial troops arrive.
LANDO: This way. 
THREEPIO: Don't blame me. I'm an interpreter. I'm not supposed to know  a power socket from a computer terminal.
THREEPIO: What are you talking about? We're not interested in the  hyperdrive on the Millennium Falcon. It's fixed! Just open the door, you stupid lump.
THREEPIO: (to Artoo) I never doubted you for a second. Wonderful! 
THREEPIO: Ouch! Oh! Ah! That hurt, Bend down, you thoughtless...Ow! 
LANDO: Leia! Go! 
THREEPIO: I thought that hairy beast would be the end of me. Of  course, I've looked better.
VADER: You are beaten. It is useless to resist. Don't let yourself be  destroyed as Obi-Wan did.
VADER: There is no escape. Don't make me destroy you. You do not yet  realize your importance. You have only begun to discover you power. Join me and I will complete your training. With our combined strength, we can end this destructive conflict and bring order to the galaxy.
LUKE: I'll never join you! 
VADER: If you only knew the power of the dark side. Obi-Wan never told  you what happened to your father.
LUKE: He told me enough! He told me you killed him. 
VADER: No. I am your father. 
LUKE: No. No. That's not true! That's impossible! 
VADER: Search your feelings. You know it to be true. 
LUKE: No! No! No! 
VADER: Luke. You can destroy the Emperor. He has foreseen this. It is  your destiny. Join me, and we can rule the galaxy as father and son. Come with me. It's the only way.
LUKE: Ben...Ben, please! 
LUKE: Ben. Leia! 
LUKE: Hear me! Leia! 
LEIA: Luke...We've got to go back. 
LANDO: What? 
LEIA: I know where Luke is. 
LANDO: But what about those fighter? 
LEIA: Chewie, just do it. 
LANDO: But what about Vader? 
LANDO: All right, all right, all right. 
VADER: Bring my shuttle. 
LANDO: (pointing out the cockpit window) Look, someone's up there. 
LEIA: It's Luke. Chewie, slow down. Slow down and we'll get under him.  Lando, open the top hatch.
LEIA: Okay. Easy, Chewie. 
LEIA: (into intercom) Lando? 
LANDO: (over intercom) Okay, let's go. 
LUKE: Oh, Leia. 
LANDO: All right, Chewie. Let's go. 
LEIA: I'll be back. 
LEIA: Star Destroyer. 
LANDO: All right, Chewie. Ready for light-speed. 
LEIA: If your people fixed the hyperdrive. 
LEIA: All the coordinates are set. It's now or never. 
LANDO: Punch it! 
LANDO: They told me they fixed it. I trusted them to fix it. It's not  my fault!
PIETT: They'll be in range of our tractor beam in moments, lord. 
VADER: Did your men deactivate the hyperdrive on the Millennium  Falcon?
PIETT: Yes, my lord. 
VADER: Good. Prepare the boarding party and set for your weapons for  stun.
PIETT: Yes, my lord. 
THREEPIO: Noisy brute. Why don't we just go into light-speed? 
THREEPIO: We can't? How would you know the hyperdrive is deactivated? 
THREEPIO: The city's central computer told you? Artoo-Detoo, you know  better than to trust a strange computer. Ouch! Pay attention to what you're doing!
VADER: Luke. 
LUKE: Father. 
VADER: Son, come with me. 
LUKE: (moaning) Ben, why didn't you tell me? 
LANDO: (into intercom) Chewie! 
LUKE: It's Vader. 
VADER: Luke...it is your destiny. 
LUKE: Ben, why didn't you tell me? 
PIETT: Alert all commands. Ready for the tractor beam. 
THREEPIO: Artoo, come back at once! You haven't finished with me yet!  You don't know how to fix the hyperdrive. Chewbacca can do it. I'm standing here in pieces, and you're having delusions of grandeur!
THREEPIO: Oh, you did it! 
LANDO: (into comlink) Luke, we're ready for takeoff. 
LUKE: (over comlink) Good luck, Lando 
LANDO: (into comlink) When we find Jabba the Hut and that bounty  hunter, we'll contact you.
LUKE: (into comlink) I'll meet you at the rendezvous point on  Tatooine.
LANDO: (into comlink) Princess, we'll find Han. I promise. 
LUKE: (into comlink) Chewie, I'll be waiting for your signal. 
LUKE: (into comlink) Take care, you two. May the Force be with you. 
LUKE: Ow! 
